  XI

  A Book was writ of late call'd Tetrachordon;
  And wov'n close, both matter, form and stile;
  The Subject new: it walk'd the Town a while,
  Numbring good intellects; now seldom por'd on.
  Cries the stall-reader, bless us! what a word on
  A title page is this! and some in file
  Stand spelling fals, while one might walk to Mile-
  End Green.  Why is it harder Sirs then Gordon,
  Colkitto, or Macdonnel, or Galasp?
  Those rugged names to our like mouths grow sleek                     10
  That would have made Quintilian stare and gasp.
  Thy age, like ours, O Soul of Sir John Cheek,
  Hated not Learning wors then Toad or Asp;
  When thou taught'st Cambridge, and King Edward Greek.

  Note: Camb. Autograph supplies title, On the Detraction which
  followed my writing certain Treatises.
  XII. On the same.

  I did but prompt the age to quit their cloggs
  By the known rules of antient libertie,
  When strait a barbarous noise environs me
  Of Owles and Cuckoes, Asses, Apes and Doggs.
  As when those Hinds that were transform'd to Froggs
  Raild at Latona's twin-born progenie
  Which after held the Sun and Moon in fee.
  But this is got by casting Pearl to Hoggs;
  That bawle for freedom in their senceless mood,
  And still revolt when truth would set them free.                     10
  Licence they mean when they cry libertie;
  For who loves that, must first be wise and good;
  But from that mark how far they roave we see
  For all this wast of wealth, and loss of blood.
  XIII

  To Mr. H. Lawes, on his Aires.

  Harry whose tuneful and well measur'd Song
  First taught our English Musick how to span
  Words with just note and accent, not to scan
  With Midas Ears, committing short and long;
  Thy worth and skill exempts thee from the throng,
  With praise enough for Envy to look wan;
  To after age thou shalt be writ the man,
  That with smooth aire couldst humor best our tongue
  Thou honour'st Verse, and Verse must send her wing
  To honour thee, the Priest of Phoebus Quire                          10
  That tun'st their happiest lines in Hymn or Story
  Dante shall give Fame leave to set thee higher
  Then his Casella, whom he woo'd to sing
  Met in the milder shades of Purgatory.

  Note: 9 send] lend  Cambridge Autograph MS.
  XIV

  When Faith and Love which parted from thee never,
  Had ripen'd thy just soul to dwell with God,
  Meekly thou didst resign this earthy load
  Of Death, call'd Life; which us from Life doth sever
  Thy Works and Alms and all thy good Endeavour
  Staid not behind, nor in the grave were trod;
  But as Faith pointed with her golden rod,
  Follow'd thee up to joy and bliss for ever.
  Love led them on, and Faith who knew them best
  Thy hand-maids, clad them o're with purple beams                     10
  And azure wings, that up they flew so drest,
  And speak the truth of thee on glorious Theams
  Before the Judge, who thenceforth bid thee rest
  And drink thy fill of pure immortal streams.

  Note: Camb. Autograph supplies title, On the Religious
  Memory of Catherine Thomson, my Christian Friend, deceased
  16 Decemb., 1646.
  XV

  ON THE LATE MASSACHER IN PIEMONT.

  Avenge O lord thy slaughter'd Saints, whose bones
  Lie scatter'd on the Alpine mountains cold,
  Ev'n them who kept thy truth so pure of old
  When all our Fathers worship't Stocks and Stones,
  Forget not: in thy book record their groanes
  Who were thy Sheep and in their antient Fold
  Slayn by the bloody Piemontese that roll'd
  Mother with Infant down the Rocks.  Their moans
  The Vales redoubl'd to the Hills, and they
  To Heav'n.  Their martyr'd blood and ashes sow                       10
  O're all th'Italian fields where still doth sway
  The triple Tyrant: that from these may grow
  A hunder'd-fold, who having learnt thy way
  Early may fly the Babylonian wo.
  XVI
  When I consider how my light is spent,
  E're half my days, in this dark world and wide,
  And that one Talent which is death to hide,
  Lodg'd with me useless, though my Soul more bent
  To serve therewith my Maker, and present
  My true account, least he returning chide,
  Doth God exact day-labour, light deny'd,
  I fondly ask; But patience to prevent
  That murmur, soon replies, God doth not need
  Either man's work or his own gifts, who best                         10
  Bear his milde yoak, they serve him best, his State
  Is Kingly.  Thousands at his bidding speed
  And post o're Land and Ocean without rest:
  They also serve who only stand and waite.
  XVII
  Lawrence of vertuous Father vertuous Son,
  Now that the Fields are dank, and ways are mire,
  Where shall we sometimes meet, and by the fire
  Help wast a sullen day; what may be Won
  From the hard Season gaining: time will run
  On smoother, till Favonius re-inspire
  The frozen earth; and cloth in fresh attire
  The Lillie and Rose, that neither sow'd nor spun.
  What neat repast shall feast us, light and choice,
  Of Attick tast, with Wine, whence we may rise                        10
  To hear the Lute well toucht, or artfull voice
  Warble immortal Notes and Tuskan Ayre?
  He who of those delights can judge, and spare
  To interpose them oft, is not unwise.
  XVIII
  Cyriack, whose Grandsire on the Royal Bench
  Of Brittish Themis, with no mean applause
  Pronounc't and in his volumes taught our Lawes,
  Which others at their Barr so often wrench:
  To day deep thoughts resolve with me to drench
  In mirth, that after no repenting drawes;
  Let Euclid rest and Archimedes pause,
  And what the Swede intend, and what the French.
  To measure life, learn thou betimes, and know
  Toward solid good what leads the nearest way;                        10
  For other things mild Heav'n a time ordains,
  And disapproves that care, though wise in show,
  That with superfluous burden loads the day,
  And when God sends a cheerful hour, refrains.
  XIX
  Methought I saw my late espoused Saint
  Brought to me like Alcestis from the grave,
  Whom Joves great Son to her glad Husband gave,
  Rescu'd from death by force though pale and faint.
  Mine as whom washt from spot of child-bed taint,
  Purification in the old Law did save,
  And such, as yet once more I trust to have
  Full sight of her in Heaven without restraint,
  Came vested all in white, pure as her mind:
  Her face was vail'd, yet to my fancied sight,                        10
  Love, sweetness, goodness, in her person shin'd
  So clear, as in no face with more delight.
  But O as to embrace me she enclin'd
  I wak'd, she fled, and day brought back my night.