CANTO I.
          What dire offence from amorous causes springs,
          What mighty contests rise from trivial things,
          I sing—This verse to Caryll,28 Muse! is due:
          This, even Belinda may vouchsafe to view:
          Slight is the subject, but not so the praise,
          If she inspire, and he approve my lays.

          Say what strange motive, Goddess! could compel
          A well-bred lord t'assault a gentle belle?
          Oh, say what stranger cause, yet unexplored,
          Could make a gentle belle reject a lord?                 10
          In tasks so bold, can little men engage,
          And in soft bosoms dwells such mighty rage?

          Sol through white curtains shot a timorous ray,
          And oped those eyes that must eclipse the day:
          Now lap-dogs give themselves the rousing shake,
          And sleepless lovers, just at twelve, awake:
          Thrice rung the bell, the slipper knock'd the ground,
          And the press'd watch return'd a silver sound.
          Belinda still her downy pillow press'd,
          Her guardian Sylph29 prolong'd the balmy rest:          20
          'Twas he had summon'd to her silent bed
          The morning-dream that hover'd o'er her head,
          A youth more glittering than a birth-night beau,
          (That even in slumber caused her cheek to glow),
          Seem'd to her ear his willing lips to lay,
          And thus in whispers said, or seem'd to say:

          'Fairest of mortals, thou distinguish'd care
          Of thousand bright inhabitants of air!
          If e'er one vision touch thy infant thought,
          Of all the nurse and all the priest have taught;         30
          Of airy elves by moonlight shadows seen,
          The silver token, and the circled green,
          Or virgins visited by angel-powers,
          With golden crowns and wreaths of heavenly flowers;
          Hear and believe! thy own importance know,
          Nor bound thy narrow views to things below.
          Some secret truths, from learned pride conceal'd,
          To maids alone and children are reveal'd:
          What though no credit doubting wits may give?
          The fair and innocent shall still believe.               40
          Know then, unnumber'd spirits round thee fly,
          The light militia of the lower sky:
          These, though unseen, are ever on the wing,
          Hang o'er the box, and hover round the ring.
          Think what an equipage thou hast in air,
          And view with scorn two pages and a chair.
          As now your own, our beings were of old,
          And once enclosed in woman's beauteous mould;
          Thence, by a soft transition, we repair
          From earthly vehicles to these of air.                   50
          Think not, when woman's transient breath is fled,
          That all her vanities at once are dead;
          Succeeding vanities she still regards,
          And though she plays no more, o'erlooks the cards.
          Her joy in gilded chariots, when alive,
          And love of ombre, after death survive.
          For when the fair in all their pride expire,
          To their first elements their souls retire:
          The sprites of fiery termagants in flame
          Mount up, and take a Salamander's name.                  60
          Soft yielding minds to water glide away,
          And sip, with Nymphs, their elemental tea.
          The graver prude sinks downward to a Gnome,
          In search of mischief still on earth to roam.
          The light coquettes in Sylphs aloft repair,
          And sport and flutter in the fields of air.

          'Know further yet; whoever fair and chaste
          Rejects mankind, is by some Sylph embraced:
          For spirits, freed from mortal laws, with ease
          Assume what sexes and what shapes they please.           70
          What guards the purity of melting maids,
          In courtly balls, and midnight masquerades,
          Safe from the treacherous friend, the daring spark,
          The glance by day, the whisper in the dark,
          When kind occasion prompts their warm desires,
          When music softens, and when dancing fires?
          'Tis but their Sylph, the wise celestials know,
          Though honour is the word with men below.

          'Some nymphs there are, too conscious of their face,
          For life predestined to the Gnomes' embrace.             80
          These swell their prospects, and exalt their pride,
          When offers are disdain'd, and love denied;
          Then gay ideas crowd the vacant brain,
          While peers, and dukes, and all their sweeping train,
          And garters, stars, and coronets appear,
          And in soft sounds, 'Your Grace' salutes their ear.
          'Tis these that early taint the female soul,
          Instruct the eyes of young coquettes to roll,
          Teach infant cheeks a bidden blush to know,
          And little hearts to flutter at a beau.                  90

          'Oft, when the world imagine women stray,
          The Sylphs through mystic mazes guide their way,
          Through all the giddy circle they pursue,
          And old impertinence expel by new.
          What tender maid but must a victim fall
          To one man's treat, but for another's ball?
          When Florio speaks, what virgin could withstand,
          If gentle Damon did not squeeze her hand?
          With varying vanities, from every part,
          They shift the moving toyshop of their heart,           100
          Where wigs with wigs, with sword-knots sword-knots strive,
          Beaux banish beaux, and coaches coaches drive.
          This erring mortals levity may call,
          Oh, blind to truth! the Sylphs contrive it all.

          'Of these am I, who thy protection claim,
          A watchful sprite, and Ariel is my name.
          Late, as I ranged the crystal wilds of air,
          In the clear mirror of thy ruling star
          I saw, alas! some dread event impend,
          Ere to the main this morning sun descend,               110
          But heaven reveals not what, or how, or where:
          Warn'd by the Sylph, oh, pious maid, beware!
          This to disclose is all thy guardian can:
          Beware of all, but most beware of man!'

          He said; when Shock, who thought she slept too long,
          Leap'd up, and waked his mistress with his tongue.
          'Twas then, Belinda, if report say true,
          Thy eyes first open'd on a billet-doux;
          Wounds, charms, and ardours, were no sooner read,
          But all the vision vanish'd from thy head.              120

          And now, unveil'd, the toilet stands display'd,
          Each silver vase in mystic order laid.
          First, robed in white, the nymph intent adores,
          With head uncover'd, the cosmetic powers.
          A heavenly image in the glass appears,
          To that she bends, to that her eyes she rears;
          The inferior priestess, at her altar's side,
          Trembling, begins the sacred rites of pride.
          Unnumber'd treasures ope at once, and here
          The various offerings of the world appear;              130
          From each she nicely culls with curious toil,
          And decks the goddess with the glittering spoil.
          This casket India's glowing gems unlocks,
          And all Arabia breathes from yonder box.
          The tortoise here, and elephant unite,
          Transform'd to combs, the speckled and the white.
          Here files of pins extend their shining rows,
          Puffs, powders, patches, Bibles, billet-doux.
          Now awful beauty puts on all its arms;
          The fair each moment rises in her charms,               140
          Repairs her smiles, awakens every grace,
          And calls forth all the wonders of her face;
          Sees by degrees a purer blush arise,
          And keener lightnings quicken in her eyes.
          The busy Sylphs surround their darling care,
          These set the head, and those divide the hair,
          Some fold the sleeve, whilst others plait the gown:
          And Betty's praised for labours not her own.

CANTO II.

          Not with more glories, in the ethereal plain,
          The sun first rises o'er the purpled main,
          Than, issuing forth, the rival of his beams
          Launched on the bosom of the silver Thames.
          Fair nymphs and well-dress'd youths around her shone,
          But every eye was fix'd on her alone.
          On her white breast a sparkling cross she wore,
          Which Jews might kiss, and infidels adore.
          Her lively looks a sprightly mind disclose,
          Quick as her eyes, and as unfix'd as those:              10
          Favours to none, to all she smiles extends;
          Oft she rejects, but never once offends.
          Bright as the sun, her eyes the gazers strike,
          And, like the sun, they shine on all alike.
          Yet graceful ease, and sweetness void of pride
          Might hide her faults, if belles had faults to hide:
          If to her share some female errors fall,
          Look on her face, and you'll forget 'em all.

          This nymph, to the destruction of mankind,
          Nourish'd two locks, which graceful hung behind          20
          In equal curls, and well conspired to deck
          With shining ringlets the smooth ivory neck.
          Love in these labyrinths his slaves detains,
          And mighty hearts are held in slender chains.
          With hairy springes we the birds betray,
          Slight lines of hair surprise the finny prey,
          Fair tresses man's imperial race ensnare,
          And beauty draws us with a single hair.

          The adventurous Baron30 the bright locks admired;
          He saw, he wished, and to the prize aspired.             30
          Resolved to win, he meditates the way,
          By force to ravish, or by fraud betray;
          For when success a lover's toil attends,
          Few ask if fraud or force attain'd his ends.

          For this, ere Phoebus rose, he had implored
          Propitious Heaven, and every power adored,
          But chiefly Love—to Love an altar built,
          Of twelve vast French romances, neatly gilt.
          There lay three garters, half a pair of gloves;
          And all the trophies of his former loves;                40
          With tender billet-doux he lights the pyre,
          And breathes three amorous sighs to raise the fire.
          Then prostrate falls, and begs with ardent eyes
          Soon to obtain, and long possess the prize:
          The powers gave ear, and granted half his prayer,
          The rest, the winds dispersed in empty air.

          But now secure the painted vessel glides,
          The sunbeams trembling on the floating tides:
          While melting music steals upon the sky,
          And soften'd sounds along the waters die;                50
          Smooth flow the waves, the zephyrs gently play,
          Belinda smiled, and all the world was gay.
          All but the Sylph—with careful thoughts oppress'd,
          The impending woe sat heavy on his breast.
          He summons straight his denizens of air;
          The lucid squadrons round the sails repair;
          Soft o'er the shrouds aërial whispers breathe,
          That seem'd but zephyrs to the train beneath.
          Some to the sun their insect-wings unfold,
          Waft on the breeze, or sink in clouds of gold;           60
          Transparent forms, too fine for mortal sight,
          Their fluid bodies half dissolved in light.
          Loose to the wind their airy garments flew,
          Thin glittering textures of the filmy dew,
          Dipp'd in the richest tincture of the skies,
          Where light disports in ever-mingling dyes;
          While every beam new transient colours flings,
          Colours that change whene'er they wave their wings.
          Amid the circle, on the gilded mast,
          Superior by the head, was Ariel placed;                  70
          His purple pinions opening to the sun,
          He raised his azure wand, and thus begun:

          'Ye Sylphs and Sylphids, to your chief give ear,
          Fays, fairies, genii, elves, and demons hear!
          Ye know the spheres, and various tasks assign'd
          By laws eternal to the aërial kind.
          Some in the fields of purest ether play,
          And bask and whiten in the blaze of day:
          Some guide the course of wandering orbs on high,
          Or roll the planets through the boundless sky:           80
          Some, less refined, beneath the moon's pale light
          Pursue the stars that shoot athwart the night,
          Or suck the mists in grosser air below,
          Or dip their pinions in the painted bow,
          Or brew fierce tempests on the wintry main,
          Or o'er the glebe distil the kindly rain.
          Others on earth o'er human race preside,
          Watch all their ways, and all their actions guide:
          Of these the chief the care of nations own,
          And guard with arms divine the British throne.31        90

          'Our humbler province is to tend the fair,
          Not a less pleasing, though less glorious care;
          To save the powder from too rude a gale,
          Nor let the imprison'd essences exhale;
          To draw fresh colours from the vernal flowers;
          To steal from rainbows, ere they drop in showers,
          A brighter wash; to curl their waving hairs,
          Assist their blushes, and inspire their airs;
          Nay, oft, in dreams, invention we bestow,
          To change a flounce, or add a furbelow.                 100

          'This day, black omens threat the brightest fair
          That e'er deserved a watchful spirit's care;
          Some dire disaster, or by force, or flight;
          But what, or where, the Fates have wrapt in night.
          Whether the nymph shall break Diana's law,
          Or some frail China jar receive a flaw;
          Or stain her honour, or her new brocade;
          Forget her prayers, or miss a masquerade;
          Or lose her heart, or necklace, at a ball;
          Or whether Heaven has doom'd that Shock must fall,      110
          Haste then, ye spirits! to your charge repair:
          The fluttering fan be Zephyretta's care;
          The drops to thee, Brillante, we consign;
          And, Momentilla, let the watch be thine;
          Do thou, Crispissa, tend her favourite lock;
          Ariel himself shall be the guard of Shock.

          'To fifty chosen Sylphs, of special note,
          We trust the important charge, the petticoat:
          Oft have we known that sevenfold fence to fail,
          Though stiff with hoops, and arm'd with ribs of whale;  120
          Form a strong line about the silver bound,
          And guard the wide circumference around.

          'Whatever spirit, careless of his charge,
          His post neglects, or leaves the fair at large,
          Shall feel sharp vengeance soon o'ertake his sins,
          Be stopp'd in vials, or transfix'd with pins;
          Or plunged in lakes of bitter washes lie,
          Or wedged whole ages in a bodkin's eye:
          Gums and pomatums shall his flight restrain,
          While, clogg'd, he beats his silken wings in vain;      130
          Or alum styptics with contracting power
          Shrink his thin essence like a rivell'd flower:
          Or, as Ixion fix'd, the wretch shall feel
          The giddy motion of the whirling mill,
          In fumes of burning chocolate shall glow,
          And tremble at the sea that froths below!'

          He spoke; the spirits from the sails descend;
          Some, orb in orb, around the nymph extend;
          Some thread the mazy ringlets of her hair;
          Some hang upon the pendants of her ear;                 140
          With beating hearts the dire event they wait,
          Anxious, and trembling for the birth of Fate.


CANTO III.

          Close by those meads, for ever crown'd with flowers,
          Where Thames with pride surveys his rising towers,
          There stands a structure of majestic frame,
          Which from the neighb'ring Hampton takes its name.
          Here Britain's statesmen oft the fall foredoom
          Of foreign tyrants, and of nymphs at home;
          Here thou, great Anna! whom three realms obey,
          Dost sometimes counsel take—and sometimes tea.

          Hither the heroes and the nymphs resort,
          To taste awhile the pleasures of a court;                10
          In various talk the instructive hours they pass'd,
          Who gave the ball, or paid the visit last;
          One speaks the glory of the British Queen,
          And one describes a charming Indian screen;
          A third interprets motions, looks, and eyes;
          At every word a reputation dies.
          Snuff, or the fan, supply each pause of chat,
          With singing, laughing, ogling, and all that.

          Meanwhile, declining from the noon of day,
          The sun obliquely shoots his burning ray;                20
          The hungry judges soon the sentence sign,
          And wretches hang that jurymen may dine;
          The merchant from the Exchange returns in peace,
          And the long labours of the toilet cease.
          Belinda now, whom thirst of fame invites,
          Burns to encounter two adventurous knights,
          At ombre singly to decide their doom,
          And swells her breast with conquests yet to come.
          Straight the three bands prepare in arras to join,
          Each band the number of the sacred Nine.                 30
          Soon as she spreads her hand, the aërial guard
          Descend, and sit on each important card:
          First Ariel perch'd upon a Matadore,
          Then each, according to the rank they bore;
          For Sylphs, yet mindful of their ancient race,
          Are, as when women, wondrous fond of place.

          Behold, four Kings in majesty revered,
          With hoary whiskers and a forky beard;
          And four fair Queens, whose hands sustain a flower,
          Th' expressive emblem of their softer power;             40
          Four Knaves in garbs succinct, a trusty band,
          Caps on their heads, and halberts in their hand;
          And particolour'd troops, a shining train,
          Draw forth to combat on the velvet plain.

          The skilful nymph reviews her force with care:
          'Let Spades be Trumps!' she said, and Trumps they were.

          Now move to war her sable Matadores,
          In show like leaders of the swarthy Moors.
          Spadillio first, unconquerable lord!
          Led off two captive Trumps, and swept the board.         50
          As many more Manillio forced to yield,
          And march'd a victor from the verdant field.
          Him Basto follow'd, but his fate more hard
          Gain'd but one Trump and one plebeian card.
          With his broad sabre next, a chief in years,
          The hoary Majesty of Spades appears,
          Puts forth one manly leg, to sight reveal'd,
          The rest, his many-colour'd robe conceal'd.
          The rebel Knave, who dares his prince engage,
          Proves the just victim of his royal rage.                60
          Even mighty Pam, that Kings and Queens o'erthrew
          And mow'd down armies in the fights of Loo,
          Sad chance of war! now destitute of aid,
          Falls undistinguish'd by the victor Spade!

          Thus far both armies to Belinda yield;
          Now to the Baron fate inclines the field.
          His warlike Amazon her host invades,
          The imperial consort of the crown of Spades.
          The Club's black tyrant first her victim died,
          Spite of his haughty mien, and barbarous pride:          70
          What boots the regal circle on his head,
          His giant limbs in state unwieldy spread;
          That long behind he trails his pompous robe,
          And, of all monarchs, only grasps the globe?

          The Baron now his Diamonds pours apace;
          The embroider'd King who shows but half his face,
          And his refulgent Queen, with powers combined,
          Of broken troops an easy conquest find.
          Clubs, Diamonds, Hearts, in wild disorder seen,
          With throngs promiscuous strew the level green.          80
          Thus when dispersed a routed army runs,
          Of Asia's troops, and Afric's sable sons,
          With like confusion different nations fly,
          Of various habit and of various dye;
          The pierced battalions disunited fall
          In heaps on heaps; one fate o'erwhelms them all.

          The Knave of Diamonds tries his wily arts,
          And wins (oh shameful chance!) the Queen of Hearts.
          At this, the blood the virgin's cheek forsook,
          A livid paleness spreads o'er all her look;              90
          She sees, and trembles at the approaching ill,
          Just in the jaws of ruin, and Codille.
          And now, (as oft in some distemper'd state)
          On one nice trick depends the general fate,
          An Ace of Hearts steps forth: the King unseen
          Lurk'd in her hand, and mourn'd his captive Queen:
          He springs to vengeance with an eager pace,
          And falls like thunder on the prostrate Ace.
          The nymph, exulting, fills with shouts the sky;
          The walls, the woods, and long canals reply.            100

          O thoughtless mortals! ever blind to fate,
          Too soon dejected, and too soon elate.
          Sudden these honours shall be snatch'd away,
          And cursed for ever this victorious day.

          For lo! the board with cups and spoons is crown'd,
          The berries crackle, and the mill turns round;
          On shining altars of Japan they raise
          The silver lamp; the fiery spirits blaze:
          From silver spouts the grateful liquors glide,
          While China's earth receives the smoking tide:          110
          At once they gratify their scent and taste,
          And frequent cups prolong the rich repast.
          Straight hover round the fair her airy band;
          Some, as she sipp'd, the fuming liquor fann'd,
          Some o'er her lap their careful plumes display'd,
          Trembling, and conscious of the rich brocade.
          Coffee (which makes the politician wise,
          And see through all things with his half-shut eyes)
          Sent up in vapours to the Baron's brain
          New stratagems, the radiant lock to gain.               120
          Ah, cease, rash youth! desist ere 'tis too late,
          Fear the just gods, and think of Scylla's fate!
          Changed to a bird, and sent to flit in air,
          She dearly pays for Nisus' injured hair!

          But when to mischief mortals bend their will,
          How soon they find fit instruments of ill!
          Just then, Clarissa drew with tempting grace
          A two-edged weapon from her shining case:
          So ladies in romance assist their knight,
          Present the spear, and arm him for the fight,           130
          He takes the gift with reverence, and extends
          The little engine on his fingers' ends:
          This just behind Belinda's neck he spread,
          As o'er the fragrant steams she bends her head.
          Swift to the lock a thousand sprites repair,
          A thousand wings, by turns, blow back the hair;
          And thrice they twitch'd the diamond in her ear;
          Thrice she look'd back, and thrice the foe drew near.
          Just in that instant, anxious Ariel sought
          The close recesses of the virgin's thought;             140
          As on the nosegay in her breast reclined,
          He watch'd the ideas rising in her mind,
          Sudden he view'd, in spite of all her art,
          An earthly lover lurking at her heart.
          Amazed, confused, he found his power expired,
          Resign'd to fate, and with a sigh retired.

          The Peer now spreads the glittering forfex wide,
          To inclose the lock; now joins it to divide.
          Even then, before the fatal engine closed,
          A wretched Sylph too fondly interposed;                 150
          Fate urged the shears, and cut the Sylph in twain,
          (But airy substance soon unites again)
          The meeting points the sacred hair dissever
          From the fair head, for ever, and for ever!

          Then flash'd the living lightning from her eyes,
          And screams of horror rend the affrighted skies.
          Not louder shrieks to pitying heaven are cast,
          When husbands, or when lapdogs breathe their last;
          Or when rich China vessels, fallen from high,
          In glittering dust and painted fragments lie!           160

          'Let wreaths of triumph now my temples twine,
          (The victor cried) the glorious prize is mine!
          While fish in streams, or birds delight in air,
          Or in a coach-and-six the British fair,
          As long as Atalantis32 shall be read,
          Or the small pillow grace a lady's bed,
          While visits shall be paid on solemn days,
          When numerous wax-lights in bright order blaze,
          While nymphs take treats, or assignations give,
          So long my honour, name, and praise shall live!'        170

          What Time would spare, from steel receives its date,
          And monuments, like men, submit to fate!
          Steel could the labour of the gods destroy,
          And strike to dust the imperial towers of Troy;
          Steel could the works of mortal pride confound,
          And hew triumphal arches to the ground.
          What wonder then, fair nymph! thy hairs should feel,
          The conquering force of unresisted steel?

CANTO IV.

          But anxious cares the pensive nymph oppress'd,
          And secret passions labour'd in her breast.
          Not youthful kings in battle seized alive,
          Not scornful virgins who their charms survive,
          Not ardent lovers robb'd of all their bliss,
          Not ancient ladies when refused a kiss,
          Not tyrants fierce that unrepenting die,
          Not Cynthia when her manteau's pinn'd awry,
          E'er felt such rage, resentment, and despair,
          As thou, sad virgin! for thy ravish'd hair.              10

          For, that sad moment, when the Sylphs withdrew,
          And Ariel weeping from Belinda flew,
          Umbriel, a dusky, melancholy sprite,
          As ever sullied the fair face of light,
          Down to the central earth, his proper scene,
          Repair'd, to search the gloomy cave of Spleen.

          Swift on his sooty pinions flits the Gnome,
          And in a vapour reach'd the dismal dome.
          No cheerful breeze this sullen region knows,
          The dreaded east is all the wind that blows;             20
          Here in a grotto, shelter'd close from air,
          And screened in shades from day's detested glare,
          She sighs for ever on her pensive bed,
          Pain at her side, and Megrim at her head.

          Two handmaids wait the throne: alike in place,
          But differing far in figure and in face.
          Here stood Ill-nature like an ancient maid,
          Her wrinkled form in black and white array'd;
          With store of prayers for mornings, nights, and noons
          Her hand is fill'd; her bosom with lampoons.             30

          There Affectation, with a sickly mien,
          Shows in her cheek the roses of eighteen;
          Practised to lisp, and hang the head aside,
          Faints into airs, and languishes with pride;
          On the rich quilt sinks with becoming woe,
          Wrapp'd in a gown, for sickness, and for show.
          The fair ones feel such maladies as these,
          When each new night-dress gives a new disease.

          A constant vapour o'er the palace flies,
          Strange phantoms rising as the mists arise;              40
          Dreadful, as hermits' dreams in haunted shades,
          Or bright, as visions of expiring maids.
          Now glaring fiends, and snakes on rolling spires,
          Pale spectres, gaping tombs, and purple fires:
          Now lakes of liquid gold, Elysian scenes,
          And crystal domes, and angels in machines.
          Unnumber'd throngs on every side are seen
          Of bodies changed to various forms by Spleen.
          Here living teapots stand, one arm held out,
          One bent; the handle this, and that the spout:           50
          A pipkin there, like Homer's tripod walks;
          Here sighs a jar, and there a goose-pie talks;
          Men prove with child, as powerful fancy works,
          And maids turn'd bottles, call aloud for corks.

          Safe pass'd the Gnome through this fantastic band,
          A branch of healing spleenwort in his hand.
          Then thus address'd the power—'Hail, wayward Queen!
          Who rule the sex to fifty from fifteen:
          Parent of vapours and of female wit,
          Who give the hysteric, or poetic fit,                    60
          On various tempers act by various ways,
          Make some take physic, others scribble plays;
          Who cause the proud their visits to delay,
          And send the godly in a pet to pray;
          A nymph there is, that all thy power disdains,
          And thousands more in equal mirth maintains.
          But oh! if e'er thy Gnome could spoil a grace,
          Or raise a pimple on a beauteous face,
          Like citron-waters matrons' cheeks inflame,
          Or change complexions at a losing game;                  70
          If e'er with airy horns I planted heads,
          Or rumpled petticoats, or tumbled beds,
          Or caused suspicion when no soul was rude,
          Or discomposed the head-dress of a prude,
          Or e'er to costive lapdog gave disease,
          Which not the tears of brightest eyes could ease:
          Hear me, and touch Belinda with chagrin,
          That single act gives half the world the spleen.'

          The goddess with a discontented air
          Seems to reject him, though she grants his prayer.       80
          A wondrous bag with both her hands she binds,
          Like that where once Ulysses held the winds;33
          There she collects the force of female lungs,
          Sighs, sobs, and passions, and the war of tongues.
          A vial next she fills with fainting fears,
          Soft sorrows, melting griefs, and flowing tears.
          The Gnome rejoicing bears her gifts away,
          Spreads his black wings, and slowly mounts to day.

          Sunk in Thalestris'34 arms the nymph he found,
          Her eyes dejected and her hair unbound.                  90
          Full o'er their heads the swelling bag he rent,
          And all the furies issued at the vent.
          Belinda burns with more than mortal ire,
          And fierce Thalestris fans the rising fire.
          'O wretched maid!' she spread her hands, and cried,
          (While Hampton's echoes 'wretched maid!' replied)
          'Was it for this you took such constant care
          The bodkin, comb, and essence to prepare?
          For this your locks in paper durance bound,
          For this with torturing irons wreath'd around?          100
          For this with fillets strain'd your tender head,
          And bravely bore the double loads of lead?
          Gods! shall the ravisher display your hair,
          While the fops envy, and the ladies stare?
          Honour forbid! at whose unrivall'd shrine
          Ease, pleasure, virtue, all our sex resign.
          Methinks already I your tears survey,
          Already hear the horrid things they say,
          Already see you a degraded toast,
          And all your honour in a whisper lost!                  110
          How shall I, then, your helpless fame defend?
          'Twill then be infamy to seem your friend!
          And shall this prize, the inestimable prize,
          Exposed through crystal to the gazing eyes,
          And heighten'd by the diamond's circling rays,
          On that rapacious hand for ever blaze?
          Sooner shall grass in Hyde-park Circus grow,
          And wits take lodgings in the sound of Bow;
          Sooner let earth, air, sea to chaos fall,
          Men, monkeys, lapdogs, parrots, perish all!'            120

          She said; then raging to Sir Plume35 repairs,
          And bids her beau demand the precious hairs:
          (Sir Plume of amber snuff-box justly vain,
          And the nice conduct of a clouded cane.)
          With earnest eyes, and round, unthinking face,
          He first the snuff-box open'd, then the case,
          And thus broke out—'My Lord, why, what the devil?
          Z—ds! damn the lock! 'fore Gad, you must be civil!
          Plague on't! 'tis past a jest—nay, prithee, pox!
          Give her the hair'—he spoke, and rapp'd his box.       130

          'It grieves me much' (replied the Peer again)
          Who speaks so well should ever speak in vain;
          'But by this lock, this sacred lock I swear,
          (Which never more shall join its parted hair;
          Which never more its honours shall renew,
          Clipp'd from the lovely head where late it grew)
          That while my nostrils draw the vital air,
          This hand, which won it, shall for ever wear.'
          He spoke, and, speaking, in proud triumph spread
          The long-contended honours of her head.                  140

          But Umbriel, hateful Gnome! forbears not so;
          He breaks the vial whence the sorrows flow.
          Then see! the nymph in beauteous grief appears,
          Her eyes half-languishing, half-drown'd in tears;
          On her heaved bosom hung her drooping head,
          Which, with a sigh, she raised; and thus she said:

          'For ever cursed be this detested day,
          Which snatch'd my best, my favourite curl away!
          Happy! ah, ten times happy had I been,
          If Hampton Court these eyes had never seen!             150
          Yet am not I the first mistaken maid,
          By love of courts to numerous ills betray'd.
          Oh, had I rather unadmired remain'd
          In some lone isle, or distant northern land;
          Where the gilt chariot never marks the way,
          Where none learn ombre, none e'er taste bohea!
          There kept my charms conceal'd from mortal eye,
          Like roses that in deserts bloom and die.
          What moved my mind with youthful lords to roam?
          Oh, had I stay'd, and said my prayers at home!          160
          'Twas this the morning omens seem'd to tell:
          Thrice from my trembling hand the patch-box fell;
          The tottering china shook without a wind,
          Nay, Poll sat mute, and Shock was most unkind!
          A Sylph too warn'd me of the threats of Fate,
          In mystic visions, now believed too late.
          See the poor remnants of these slighted hairs!
          My hands shall rend what ev'n thy rapine spares:
          These in two sable ringlets taught to break,
          Once gave new beauties to the snowy neck;               170
          The sister-lock now sits uncouth, alone,
          And in its fellow's fate foresees its own;
          Uncurl'd it hangs, the fatal shears demands,
          And tempts, once more, thy sacrilegious hands.
          Oh hadst thou, cruel! been content to seize
          Hairs less in sight, or any hairs but these!'

CANTO V.

          She said: the pitying audience melt in tears;
          But Fate and Jove had stopp'd the Baron's ears.
          In vain Thalestris with reproach assails,
          For who can move when fair Belinda fails?
          Not half so fix'd the Trojan could remain,
          While Anna begg'd and Dido raged in vain.
          Then grave Clarissa graceful waved her fan;
          Silence ensued, and thus the nymph began:

          'Say, why are beauties praised and honour'd most,
          The wise man's passion, and the vain man's toast?        10
          Why deck'd with all that land and sea afford?
          Why angels call'd, and angel-like adored?
          Why round our coaches crowd the white-gloved beaux?
          Why bows the side-box from its inmost rows?
          How vain are all these glories, all our pains,
          Unless good sense preserve what beauty gains:
          That men may say, when we the front-box grace,
          Behold the first in virtue as in face!
          Oh! if to dance all night, and dress all day,
          Charm'd the small-pox, or chased old-age away;           20
          Who would not scorn what housewife's cares produce,
          Or who would learn one earthly thing of use?
          To patch, nay ogle, might become a saint,
          Nor could it, sure, be such a sin to paint.
          But since, alas! frail beauty must decay,
          Curl'd or uncurl'd, since locks will turn to gray;
          Since painted, or not painted, all shall fade,
          And she who scorns a man, must die a maid;
          What then remains, but well our power to use,
          And keep good-humour still, whate'er we lose?            30
          And trust me, dear! good-humour can prevail,
          When airs, and flights, and screams, and scolding fail.
          Beauties in vain their pretty eyes may roll;
          Charms strike the sight, but merit wins the soul.'

          So spoke the dame, but no applause ensued;
          Belinda frown'd, Thalestris call'd her prude.
          'To arms, to arms!' the fierce virago cries,
          And swift as lightning to the combat flies.
          All side in parties, and begin the attack;
          Fans clap, silks rustle, and tough whalebones crack;     40
          Heroes' and heroines' shouts confusedly rise,
          And bass and treble voices strike the skies.
          No common weapons in their hands are found,
          Like gods they fight, nor dread a mortal wound.

          So when bold Homer makes the gods engage,
          And heavenly breasts with human passions rage;
          'Gainst Pallas, Mars; Latona, Hermes arms,
          And all Olympus rings with loud alarms:
          Jove's thunder roars, heaven trembles all around,
          Blue Neptune storms, the bellowing deeps resound:        50
          Earth shakes her nodding towers, the ground gives way,
          And the pale ghosts start at the flash of day!

          Triumphant Umbriel on a sconce's height
          Clapp'd his glad wings, and sat to view the fight;
          Propp'd on their bodkin spears, the sprites survey
          The growing combat, or assist the fray.

          While through the press enraged Thalestris flies,
          And scatters death around from both her eyes,
          A beau and witling perish'd in the throng,
          One died in metaphor, and one in song.                   60
          'O cruel nymph! a living death I bear,'
          Cried Dapperwit, and sunk beside his chair.
          A mournful glance Sir Fopling upwards cast,
          'Those eyes are made so killing!'—was his last.
          Thus on Maeander's36 flowery margin lies
          The expiring swan, and as he sings he dies.

          When bold Sir Plume had drawn Clarissa down,
          Chloe stepped in, and kill'd him with a frown;
          She smiled to see the doughty hero slain,
          But, at her smile, the beau revived again.               70

          Now Jove suspends his golden scales in air,
          Weighs the men's wits against the lady's hair;
          The doubtful beam long nods from side to side;
          At length the wits mount up, the hairs subside.

          See fierce Belinda on the Baron flies,
          With more than usual lightning in her eyes:
          Nor fear'd the chief th' unequal fight to try,
          Who sought no more than on his foe to die.
          But this bold lord, with manly strength endued,
          She with one finger and a thumb subdued:                 80
          Just where the breath of life his nostrils drew,
          A charge of snuff the wily virgin threw;
          The Gnomes direct, to every atom just,
          The pungent grains of titillating dust.
          Sudden, with starting tears each eye o'erflows,
          And the high dome re-echoes to his nose.
          'Now meet thy fate!' incensed Belinda cried,
          And drew a deadly bodkin from her side,
          (The same, his ancient personage to deck,
          Her great-great-grandsire wore about his neck,           90
          In three seal-rings; which after, melted down,
          Form'd a vast buckle for his widow's gown:
          Her infant grandame's whistle next it grew,
          The bells she jingled, and the whistle blew;
          Then in a bodkin graced her mother's hairs,
          Which long she wore, and now Belinda wears.)
          'Boast not my fall,' (he cried) 'insulting foe!
          Thou by some other shalt be laid as low.
          Nor think, to die dejects my lofty mind:                100
          All that I dread is leaving you behind!
          Rather than so, ah! let me still survive,
          And burn in Cupid's flames,—but burn alive.'

          'Restore the lock!' she cries; and all around
          'Restore the lock!' the vaulted roofs rebound.
          Not fierce Othello in so loud a strain
          Roar'd for the handkerchief that caused his pain.
          But see how oft ambitious aims are cross'd,
          And chiefs contend till all the prize is lost!
          The lock, obtain'd with guilt, and kept with pain,
          In every place is sought, but sought in vain:           110
          With such a prize no mortal must be blest,
          So Heaven decrees! with Heaven who can contest?

          Some thought it mounted to the lunar sphere,
          Since all things lost on earth are treasured there.
          There heroes' wits are kept in ponderous vases,
          And beaux' in snuff-boxes and tweezer-cases.
          There broken vows, and death-bed alms are found,
          And lovers' hearts with ends of ribbon bound,
          The courtier's promises, and sick man's prayers,
          The smiles of harlots, and the tears of heirs,          120
          Cages for gnats, and chains to yoke a flea,
          Dried butterflies, and tomes of casuistry.

          But trust the Muse—she saw it upward rise,
          Though mark'd by none but quick, poetic eyes:
          (So Rome's great founder to the heavens withdrew,
          To Proculus alone confess'd in view)
          A sudden star, it shot through liquid air,
          And drew behind a radiant trail of hair.
          Not Berenice's locks first rose so bright,
          The heaven's bespangling with dishevell'd light.        130
          The Sylphs behold it kindling as it flies,
          And, pleased, pursue its progress through the skies.

          This the beau-monde shall from the Mall survey,
          And hail with music its propitious ray.
          This the bless'd lover shall for Venus take,
          And send up vows from Rosamonda's lake.
          This Partridge37 soon shall view in cloudless skies,
          When next he looks through Galileo's eyes;
          And hence th' egregious wizard shall foredoom
          The fate of Louis, and the fall of Rome.                140

          Then cease, bright nymph! to mourn thy ravish'd hair,
          Which adds new glory to the shining sphere!
          Not all the tresses that fair head can boast,
          Shall draw such envy as the lock you lost.
          For, after all the murders of your eye,
          When, after millions slain, yourself shall die;
          When those fair suns shall set, as set they must,
          And all those tresses shall be laid in dust,
          This lock the Muse shall consecrate to fame,
          And 'midst the stars inscribe Belinda's name.           150

          WINDSOR-FOREST.38

          TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE GEORGE LORD LANSDOWNE.
          'Non injussa cano: te nostrae, Vare, myricae,
          Te nemus omne canet; nee Phoebo gratior ulla est,
          Quam sibi quae Vari praescripsit pagina nomen.'

          VIRG.
          Thy forests, Windsor! and thy green retreats,
          At once the Monarch's and the Muse's seats,
          Invite my lays. Be present, sylvan Maids!
          Unlock your springs, and open all your shades.
          Granville commands; your aid, O Muses, bring!
          What Muse for Granville can refuse to sing?

          The groves of Eden, vanish'd now so long,
          Live in description, and look green in song:
          These, were my breast inspired with equal flame,
          Like them in beauty, should be like in fame.             10
          Here hills and vales, the woodland and the plain,
          Here earth and water seem to strive again;
          Not chaos-like, together crush'd and bruised,
          But, as the world, harmoniously confused;
          Where order in variety we see,
          And where, though all things differ, all agree.
          Here waving groves a chequer'd scene display,
          And part admit, and part exclude the day;
          As some coy nymph her lover's warm address
          Nor quite indulges, nor can quite repress.               20
          There, interspersed in lawns and opening glades,
          Thin trees arise that shun each other's shades.
          Here in full light the russet plains extend:
          There, wrapt in clouds the bluish hills ascend.
          Ev'n the wild heath displays her purple dyes,
          And 'midst the desert fruitful fields arise,
          That crown'd with tufted trees and springing corn,
          Like verdant isles the sable waste adorn.
          Let India boast her plants, nor envy we
          The weeping amber or the balmy tree,                     30
          While by our oaks the precious loads are born,
          And realms commanded which those trees adorn.
          Not proud Olympus yields a nobler sight,
          Though gods assembled grace his towering height.
          Than what more humble mountains offer here,
          Where, in their blessings, all those gods appear.
          See Pan with flocks, with fruits Pomona crown'd,
          Here blushing Flora paints the enamell'd ground,
          Here Ceres' gifts in waving prospect stand,
          And nodding tempt the joyful reaper's hand;              40
          Rich industry sits smiling on the plains,
          And peace and plenty tell a Stuart39 reigns.

          Not thus the land appear'd in ages past,
          A dreary desert, and a gloomy waste,
          To savage beasts and savage laws40 a prey,
          And kings more furious and severe than they;
          Who claim'd the skies, dispeopled air and floods,
          The lonely lords of empty wilds and woods:
          Cities laid waste, they storm'd the dens and caves,
          (For wiser brutes were backward to be slaves).           50
          What could be free, when lawless beasts obey'd,
          And even the elements a tyrant sway'd?
          In vain kind seasons swell'd the teeming grain,
          Soft showers distill'd, and suns grew warm in vain;
          The swain with tears his frustrate labour yields,
          And famish'd dies amidst his ripen'd fields.
          What wonder, then, a beast or subject slain
          Were equal crimes in a despotic reign?
          Both doom'd alike, for sportive tyrants bled,
          But while the subject starved, the beast was fed.        60
          Proud Nimrod first the bloody chase began,
          A mighty hunter, and his prey was man:
          Our haughty Norman boasts that barbarous name,
          And makes his trembling slaves the royal game.
          The fields are ravish'd41 from the industrious swains,
          From men their cities, and from gods their fanes:
          The levell'd towns with weeds lie cover'd o'er;
          The hollow winds through naked temples roar;
          Round broken columns clasping ivy twined;
          O'er heaps of ruin stalk'd the stately hind;             70
          The fox obscene to gaping tombs retires,
          And savage howlings fill the sacred choirs.
          Awed by his Nobles, by his Commons cursed,
          The oppressor ruled tyrannic where he durst,
          Stretch'd o'er the poor and Church his iron rod,
          And served alike his vassals and his God.
          Whom even the Saxon spared, and bloody Dane,
          The wanton victims of his sport remain.
          But see, the man who spacious regions gave
          A waste for beasts, himself denied a grave!42           80
          Stretch'd on the lawn, his second hope43 survey,
          At once the chaser, and at once the prey:
          Lo Rufus, tugging at the deadly dart,
          Bleeds in the forest like a wounded hart.
          Succeeding monarchs heard the subjects' cries,
          Nor saw displeased the peaceful cottage rise.
          Then gathering flocks on unknown mountains fed,
          O'er sandy wilds were yellow harvests spread,
          The forests wonder'd at the unusual grain,
          And secret transport touch'd the conscious swain.        90
          Fair Liberty, Britannia's goddess, rears
          Her cheerful head, and leads the golden years.

          Ye vigorous swains! while youth ferments your blood,
          And purer spirits swell the sprightly flood,
          Now range the hills, the gameful woods beset,
          Wind the shrill horn, or spread the waving net.
          When milder autumn summer's heat succeeds,
          And in the new-shorn field the partridge feeds,
          Before his lord the ready spaniel bounds,
          Panting with hope, he tries the furrow'd grounds;       100
          But when the tainted gales the game betray,
          Couch'd close he lies, and meditates the prey:
          Secure they trust the unfaithful field beset,
          Till hovering o'er 'em sweeps the swelling net.
          Thus (if small things we may with great compare)
          When Albion sends her eager sons to war,
          Some thoughtless town, with ease and plenty blest,
          Near, and more near, the closing lines invest;
          Sudden they seize the amazed, defenceless prize,
          And high in air Britannia's standard flies.             110

          See! from the brake the whirring pheasant springs,
          And mounts exulting on triumphant wings:
          Short is his joy; he feels the fiery wound,
          Flutters in blood, and panting beats the ground.
          Ah! what avail his glossy, varying dyes,
          His purple crest, and scarlet-circled eyes,
          The vivid green his shining plumes unfold,
          His painted wings, and breast that flames with gold?

          Nor yet, when moist Arcturus clouds the sky,
          The woods and fields their pleasing toils deny.         120
          To plains with well-breath'd beagles we repair,
          And trace the mazes of the circling hare;
          (Beasts, urged by us, their fellow-beasts pursue,
          And learn of man each other to undo.)
          With slaughtering gun the unwearied fowler roves,
          When frosts have whiten'd all the naked groves;
          Where doves in flocks the leafless trees o'ershade,
          And lonely woodcocks haunt the watery glade.
          He lifts the tube, and levels with his eye;
          Straight a short thunder breaks the frozen sky;         130
          Oft, as in airy rings they skim the heath,
          The clamorous lapwings feel the leaden death:
          Oft, as the mounting larks their notes prepare,
          They fall, and leave their little lives in air.

          In genial spring, beneath the quivering shade,
          Where cooling vapours breathe along the mead,
          The patient fisher takes his silent stand,
          Intent, his angle trembling in his hand:
          With looks unmoved, he hopes the scaly breed,
          And eyes the dancing cork, and bending reed.            140
          Our plenteous streams a various race supply,
          The bright-eyed perch with fins of Tyrian dye,
          The silver eel, in shining volumes roll'd,
          The yellow carp, in scales bedropp'd with gold,
          Swift trouts, diversified with crimson stains,
          And pikes, the tyrants of the watery plains.

          Now Cancer glows with Phoebus' fiery car:
          The youth rush eager to the sylvan war,
          Swarm o'er the lawns, the forest walks surround,
          Rouse the fleet hart, and cheer the opening hound.      150
          The impatient courser pants in every vein,
          And pawing, seems to beat the distant plain:
          Hills, vales, and floods appear already cross'd,
          And ere he starts, a thousand steps are lost.
          See the bold youth strain up the threatening steep,
          Rush through the thickets, down the valleys sweep,
          Hang o'er their coursers' heads with eager speed,
          And earth rolls back beneath the flying steed.
          Let old Arcadia boast her ample plain,
          The immortal huntress, and her virgin-train;            160
          Nor envy, Windsor! since thy shades have seen
          As bright a goddess, and as chaste a queen,44
          Whose care, like hers, protects the sylvan reign,
          The earth's fair light, and empress of the main.

          Here too, 'tis sung, of old Diana stray'd,
          And Cynthus' top forsook for Windsor shade;
          Here was she seen o'er airy wastes to rove,
          Seek the clear spring, or haunt the pathless grove;
          Here, arm'd with silver bows, in early dawn,
          Her buskin'd virgins traced the dewy lawn.              170

          Above the rest a rural nymph was famed,
          Thy offspring, Thames! the fair Lodona named;
          (Lodona's fate, in long oblivion cast,
          The Muse shall sing, and what she sings shall last).
          Scarce could the goddess from her nymph be known,
          But by the crescent and the golden zone.
          She scorn'd the praise of beauty, and the care;
          A belt her waist, a fillet binds her hair;
          A painted quiver on her shoulder sounds,
          And with her dart the flying deer she wounds.
          It chanced, as eager of the chase, the maid
          Beyond the forest's verdant limits stray'd,             180
          Pan saw and loved, and, burning with desire,
          Pursued her flight, her flight increased his fire.
          Not half so swift the trembling doves can fly,
          When the fierce eagle cleaves the liquid sky;
          Not half so swiftly the fierce eagle moves,
          When through the clouds he drives the trembling doves;
          As from the god she flew with furious pace,
          Or as the god, more furious, urged the chase.
          Now fainting, sinking, pale the nymph appears;
          Now close behind, his sounding steps she hears;         190
          And now his shadow reach'd her as she run,
          His shadow lengthen'd by the setting sun;
          And now his shorter breath, with sultry air,
          Pants on her neck, and fans her parting hair.
          In vain on father Thames she calls for aid,
          Nor could Diana help her injured maid.
          Faint, breathless, thus she pray'd, nor pray'd in vain:
          'Ah, Cynthia! ah—though banish'd from thy train,
          Let me, oh! let me, to the shades repair,
          My native shades—there weep, and murmur there.'        200
          She said, and melting as in tears she lay,
          In a soft, silver stream dissolved away.
          The silver stream her virgin coldness keeps,
          For ever murmurs, and for ever weeps;
          Still bears the name45 the hapless virgin bore,
          And bathes the forest where she ranged before.
          In her chaste current oft the goddess laves,
          And with celestial tears augments the waves.
          Oft in her glass the musing shepherd spies
          The headlong mountains and the downward skies,          210
          The watery landscape of the pendent woods,
          And absent trees that tremble in the floods;
          In the clear azure gleam the flocks are seen,
          And floating forests paint the waves with green,
          Through the fair scene roll slow the lingering streams,
          Then foaming pour along, and rush into the Thames.

          Thou, too, great Father of the British floods!
          With joyful pride survey'st our lofty woods;
          Where towering oaks their growing honours rear,
          And future navies on thy shores appear.                 220
          Not Neptune's self from all her streams receives
          A wealthier tribute, than to thine he gives.
          No seas so rich, so gay no banks appear,
          No lake so gentle, and no spring so clear.
          Nor Po so swells the fabling poet's lays,
          While led along the skies his current strays,
          As thine, which visits Windsor's famed abodes,
          To grace the mansion of our earthly gods:
          Nor all his stars above a lustre show,
          Like the bright beauties on thy banks below;            230
          Where Jove, subdued by mortal passion still,
          Might change Olympus for a nobler hill.

          Happy the man whom this bright court approves,
          His sovereign favours, and his country loves:
          Happy next him who to these shades retires,
          Whom Nature charms, and whom the Muse inspires:
          Whom humbler joys of home-felt quiet please,
          Successive study, exercise, and ease.
          He gathers health from herbs the forest yields,
          And of their fragrant physic spoils the fields:         240
          With chemic art exalts the mineral powers,
          And draws the aromatic souls of flowers:
          Now marks the course of rolling orbs on high;
          O'er figured worlds now travels with his eye;
          Of ancient writ unlocks the learnèd store,
          Consults the dead, and lives past ages o'er:
          Or wandering thoughtful in the silent wood,
          Attends the duties of the wise and good,
          To observe a mean, be to himself a friend,
          To follow nature, and regard his end;                   250
          Or looks on Heaven with more than mortal eyes,
          Bids his free soul expatiate in the skies,
          Amid her kindred stars familiar roam,
          Survey the region, and confess her home!
          Such was the life great Scipio once admired,
          Thus Atticus, and Trumbull46 thus retired.

          Ye sacred Nine! that all my soul possess,
          Whose raptures fire me, and whose visions bless,
          Bear me, oh, bear me to sequester'd scenes,
          The bowery mazes, and surrounding greens:               260
          To Thames's banks which fragrant breezes fill,
          Or where ye Muses sport on Cooper's Hill.47
          (On Cooper's Hill eternal wreaths shall grow,
          While lasts the mountain, or while Thames shall flow.)
          I seem through consecrated walks to rove,
          I hear soft music die along the grove:
          Led by the sound, I roam from shade to shade,
          By godlike poets venerable made:
          Here his first lays majestic Denham sung;
          There the last numbers flow'd from Cowley's tongue.48 270
          Oh early lost! what tears the river shed,
          When the sad pomp along his banks was led!
          His drooping swans on every note expire,
          And on his willows hung each Muse's lyre.

          Since fate relentless stopp'd their heavenly voice,
          No more the forests ring, or groves rejoice;
          Who now shall charm the shades, where Cowley strung
          His living harp, and lofty Denham sung?
          But hark! the groves rejoice, the forest rings!
          Are these revived? or is it Granville sings?            280
          'Tis yours, my lord, to bless our soft retreats,
          And call the Muses to their ancient seats;
          To paint anew the flowery sylvan scenes,
          To crown the forest with immortal greens,
          Make Windsor hills in lofty numbers rise,
          And lift her turrets nearer to the skies;
          To sing those honours you deserve to wear,
          And add new lustre to her silver star.

          Here noble Surrey49 felt the sacred rage,
          Surrey, the Granville of a former age:                  290
          Matchless his pen, victorious was his lance,
          Bold in the lists, and graceful in the dance:
          In the same shades the Cupids tuned his lyre,
          To the same notes, of love and soft desire:
          Fair Geraldine, bright object of his vow,
          Then fill'd the groves, as heavenly Mira now.

          Oh, wouldst thou sing what heroes Windsor bore,
          What kings first breathed upon her winding shore,
          Or raise old warriors, whose adored remains
          In weeping vaults her hallow'd earth contains!          300
          With Edward's acts50 adorn the shining page,
          Stretch his long triumphs down through every age,
          Draw monarchs chain'd, and Cressy's glorious field,
          The lilies blazing on the regal shield:
          Then, from her roofs when Verrio's colours fall,
          And leave inanimate the naked wall,
          Still in thy song should vanquish'd France appear,
          And bleed for ever under Britain's spear.

          Let softer strains ill-fated Henry mourn,51
          And palms eternal flourish round his urn.               310
          Here o'er the martyr-king the marble weeps,
          And, fast beside him, once-fear'd Edward sleeps.52
          Whom not the extended Albion could contain,
          From old Belerium to the northern main,
          The grave unites; where ev'n the great find rest,
          And blended lie the oppressor and the oppress'd!

          Make sacred Charles' tomb for ever known,
          (Obscure the place, and uninscribed the stone)
          Oh fact accursed! what tears has Albion shed,
          Heavens, what new wounds! and how her old have bled!    320
          She saw her sons with purple deaths expire,
          Her sacred domes involved in rolling fire,
          A dreadful series of intestine wars,
          Inglorious triumphs and dishonest scars.
          At length great Anna said—'Let discord cease!'
          She said, the world obey'd, and all was peace!

          In that blest moment, from his oozy bed
          Old Father Thames advanced his reverend head;
          His tresses dropp'd with dews, and o'er the stream
          His shining horns diffused a golden gleam:              330
          Graved on his urn appear'd the moon, that guides
          His swelling waters, and alternate tides;
          The figured streams in waves of silver roll'd,
          And on their banks Augusta53 rose in gold.
          Around his throne the sea-born brothers stood,
          Who swell with tributary urns his flood;
          First the famed authors of his ancient name,
          The winding Isis and the fruitful Thame:
          The Kennet swift, for silver eels renown'd;
          The Loddon slow, with verdant alders crown'd;           340
          Cole, whose dark streams his flowery islands lave;
          And chalky Wey, that rolls a milky wave;
          The blue, transparent Vandalis appears;
          The gulfy Lee his sedgy tresses rears;
          And sullen Mole, that hides his diving flood;
          And silent Darent, stain'd with Danish blood.

          High in the midst, upon his urn reclined,
          (His sea-green mantle waving with the wind)
          The god appear'd: he turn'd his azure eyes
          Where Windsor-domes and pompous turrets rise;           350
          Then bow'd and spoke; the winds forget to roar,
          And the hush'd waves glide softly to the shore.

          Hail, sacred Peace! hail, long-expected days,
          That Thames's glory to the stars shall raise!
          Though Tiber's streams immortal Rome behold,
          Though foaming Hermus swells with tides of gold,
          From heaven itself though sevenfold Nilus flows,
          And harvests on a hundred realms bestows;
          These now no more shall be the Muse's themes,
          Lost in my fame, as in the sea their streams.           360
          Let Volga's banks with iron squadrons shine,
          And groves of lances glitter on the Rhine,
          Let barbarous Ganges arm a servile train;
          Be mine the blessings of a peaceful reign.
          No more my sons shall dye with British blood
          Red Iber's sands, or Ister's foaming flood:
          Safe on my shore each unmolested swain
          Shall tend the flocks, or reap the bearded grain;
          The shady empire shall retain no trace
          Of war or blood, but in the sylvan chase;               370
          The trumpet sleep, while cheerful horns are blown,
          And arms employ'd on birds and beasts alone.
          Behold! the ascending villas on my side,
          Project long shadows o'er the crystal tide,
          Behold! Augusta's glittering spires increase,
          And temples rise,54 the beauteous works of Peace.
          I see, I see, where two fair cities bend
          Their ample bow, a new Whitehall ascend!
          There mighty nations shall inquire their doom,
          The world's great oracle in times to come;              380
          There kings shall sue, and suppliant states be seen
          Once more to bend before a British queen.

          Thy trees, fair Windsor! now shall leave their woods,
          And half thy forests rush into the floods,
          Bear Britain's thunder, and her cross display,
          To the bright regions of the rising day;
          Tempt icy seas, where scarce the waters roll,
          Where clearer flames glow round the frozen pole;
          Or under southern skies exalt their sails,
          Led by new stars, and borne by spicy gales!             390
          For me the balm shall bleed, and amber flow,
          The coral redden, and the ruby glow,
          The pearly shell its lucid globe infold,
          And Phoebus warm the ripening ore to gold.
          The time shall come when, free as seas or wind,
          Unbounded Thames shall flow for all mankind,
          Whole nations enter with each swelling tide,
          And seas but join the regions they divide;
          Earth's distant ends our glory shall behold,
          And the new world launch forth to seek the old.         400
          Then ships of uncouth form shall stem the tide,
          And feather'd people crowd my wealthy side,
          And naked youths and painted chiefs admire
          Our speech, our colour, and our strange attire!
          O stretch thy reign, fair Peace! from shore to shore,
          Till conquest cease, and slavery be no more;
          Till the freed Indians in their native groves
          Reap their own fruits, and woo their sable loves,
          Peru once more a race of kings behold,
          And other Mexicos be roof'd with gold.                  410
          Exiled by thee from earth to deepest hell,
          In brazen bonds, shall barbarous Discord dwell;
          Gigantic Pride, pale Terror, gloomy Care,
          And mad Ambition shall attend her there:
          There purple Vengeance bathed in gore retires,
          Her weapons blunted, and extinct her fires:
          There hateful Envy her own snakes shall feel,
          And Persecution mourn her broken wheel:
          There Faction roar, Rebellion bite her chain,
          And gasping Furies thirst for blood in vain.            420

          Here cease thy flight, nor with unhallow'd lays
          Touch the fair fame of Albion's golden days:
          The thoughts of gods let Granville's verse recite,
          And bring the scenes of opening fate to light.
          My humble Muse, in unambitious strains,
          Paints the green forests and the flowery plains,
          Where Peace descending bids her olives spring,
          And scatters blessings from her dove-like wing.
          Ev'n I more sweetly pass my careless days,
          Pleased in the silent shade with empty praise;          430
          Enough for me, that to the listening swains
          First in these fields I sung the sylvan strains.