I. CHAUCER.
          Women ben full of ragerie,
          Yet swinken nat sans secresie.
          Thilke moral shall ye understond,
          From schoole-boy's tale of fayre Irelond:
          Which to the fennes hath him betake,
          To filche the gray ducke fro the lake.
          Right then, there passen by the way
          His aunt, and eke her daughters tway.
          Ducke in his trowses hath he hent,
          Not to be spied of ladies gent.                          10
          'But ho! our nephew!' crieth one;
          'Ho!' quoth another, 'Cozen John;'
          And stoppen, and lough, and callen out,—
          This sely clerke full low doth lout:
          They asken that, and talken this,
          'Lo here is Coz, and here is Miss.'
          But, as he glozeth with speeches soote,
          The ducke sore tickleth his erse roote:
          Fore-piece and buttons all to-brest,
          Forth thrust a white neck, and red crest.                20
          'Te-he,' cried ladies; clerke nought spake:
          Miss stared; and gray ducke crieth 'Quaake.'
          'O moder, moder!' quoth the daughter,
          'Be thilke same thing maids longen a'ter?
          Bette is to pyne on coals and chalke,
          Then trust on mon, whose yerde can talke.'
 






II. SPENSER.
          THE ALLEY.

          1 In every town, where Thamis rolls his tyde,
              A narrow pass there is, with houses low;
            Where ever and anon the stream is eyed,
              And many a boat soft sliding to and fro.
              There oft are heard the notes of infant woe,
            The short thick sob, loud scream, and shriller squall:
              How can ye, mothers, vex your children so?
            Some play, some eat, some cack against the wall,
            And as they crouchen low, for bread and butter call.

          2 And on the broken pavement, here and there,
              Doth many a stinking sprat and herring lie;
            A brandy and tobacco shop is near,
              And hens, and dogs, and hogs are feeding by;
              And here a sailor's jacket hangs to dry.
            At every door are sunburnt matrons seen,
              Mending old nets to catch the scaly fry;
            Now singing shrill, and scolding oft between;
            Scolds answer foul-mouth'd scolds; bad neighbourhood, I ween.

          3 The snappish cur (the passenger's annoy)
              Close at my heel with yelping treble flies;
            The whimpering girl, and hoarser-screaming boy,
              Join to the yelping treble shrilling cries;
              The scolding quean to louder notes doth rise,
            And her full pipes those shrilling cries confound;
              To her full pipes the grunting hog replies;
            The grunting hogs alarm the neighbours round,
            And curs, girls, boys, and scolds, in the deep base are drown'd.

          4 Hard by a sty, beneath a roof of thatch,
              Dwelt Obloquy, who in her early days
            Baskets of fish at Billingsgate did watch,
              Cod, whiting, oyster, mack'rel, sprat, or plaice:
              There learn'd she speech from tongues that never cease.
            Slander beside her, like a magpie, chatters,
              With Envy (spitting cat!), dread foe to peace;
            Like a cursed cur, Malice before her clatters,
            And vexing every wight, tears clothes and all to tatters.

          5 Her dugs were mark'd by every collier's hand,
              Her mouth was black as bull-dog's at the stall:
            She scratchèd, bit, and spared ne lace ne band,
              And 'bitch' and 'rogue' her answer was to all;
              Nay, even the parts of shame by name would call:
            Yea, when she passèd by or lane or nook,
              Would greet the man who turn'd him to the wall,
            And by his hand obscene the porter took,
            Nor ever did askance like modest virgin look.

          6 Such place hath Deptford, navy-building town,
              Woolwich and Wapping, smelling strong of pitch;
            Such Lambeth, envy of each band and gown,
              And Twick'nam such, which fairer scenes enrich,
              Grots, stutues, urns, and Jo—n's dog and bitch,
            Ne village is without, on either side,
              All up the silver Thames, or all adown;
            Ne Richmond's self, from whose tall front are eyed
            Vales, spires, meandering streams, and Windsor's towery pride.
 






III. WALLER.
          OF A LADY SINGING TO HER LUTE.

          Fair charmer, cease! nor make your voice's prize,
          A heart resign'd, the conquest of your eyes:
          Well might, alas! that threaten'd vessel fail,
          Which winds and lightning both at once assail.
          We were too blest with these enchanting lays,
          Which must be heavenly when an angel plays:
          But killing charms your lover's death contrive,
          Lest heavenly music should be heard alive.
          Orpheus could charm the trees, but thus a tree,
          Taught by your hand, can charm no less than he:
          A poet made the silent wood pursue,
          This vocal wood had drawn the poet too.
 






ON A FAN OF THE AUTHOR'S DESIGN,
IN WHICH WAS PAINTED THE STORY OF CEPHALUS AND PROCRIS, WITH THE MOTTO, 'AURA VENI.'
          'Come, gentle Air!' the Aeolian shepherd said,
          While Procris panted in the secret shade;
          'Come, gentle Air!' the fairer Delia cries,
          While at her feet her swain expiring lies.
          Lo! the glad gales o'er all her beauties stray,
          Breathe on her lips, and in her bosom play!
          In Delia's hand this toy is fatal found,
          Nor could that fabled dart more surely wound:
          Both gifts destructive to the givers prove;
          Alike both lovers fall by those they love.
          Yet guiltless too this bright destroyer lives,
          At random wounds, nor knows the wound she gives:
          She views the story with attentive eyes,
          And pities Procris, while her lover dies.
 






IV. COWLEY.
          THE GARDEN.

          Fain would my Muse the flowery treasures sing,
          And humble glories of the youthful Spring;
          Where opening roses breathing sweets diffuse,
          And soft carnations shower their balmy dews;
          Where lilies smile in virgin robes of white,
          The thin undress of superficial light,
          And varied tulips show so dazzling gay,
          Blushing in bright diversities of day.
          Each painted floweret in the lake below
          Surveys its beauties, whence its beauties grow;          10
          And pale Narcissus on the bank, in vain
          Transformèd, gazes on himself again.
          Here aged trees cathedral walks compose,
          And mount the hill in venerable rows:
          There the green infants in their beds are laid,
          The garden's hope, and its expected shade.
          Here orange-trees with blooms and pendants shine,
          And vernal honours to their autumn join;
          Exceed their promise in the ripen'd store,               20
          Yet in the rising blossom promise more.
          There in bright drops the crystal fountains play,
          By laurels shielded from the piercing day:
          Where Daphne, now a tree, as once a maid,
          Still from Apollo vindicates her shade,
          Still turns her beauties from the invading beam,
          Nor seeks in vain for succour to the stream.
          The stream at once preserves her virgin leaves,
          At once a shelter from her boughs receives,
          Where summer's beauty midst of winter stays,
          And winter's coolness spite of summer's rays.            30
 






WEEPING.
          1 While Celia's tears make sorrow bright,
              Proud grief sits swelling in her eyes;
            The sun, next those the fairest light,
              Thus from the ocean first did rise:
            And thus through mists we see the sun,
            Which, else we durst not gaze upon.

          2 These silver drops, like morning dew,
              Foretell the fervour of the day:
            So from one cloud soft showers we view,
              And blasting lightnings burst away.
            The stars that fall from Celia's eye,
            Declare our doom in drawing nigh.

          3 The baby in that sunny sphere
              So like a Phaëton appears,
            That Heaven, the threaten'd world to spare,
              Thought fit to drown him in her tears:
            Else might the ambitious nymph aspire,
            To set, like him, Heaven too on fire.
 






V. EARL OF ROCHESTER.
          ON SILENCE.61

           1 Silence! coeval with eternity;
             Thou wert, ere Nature's self began to be,
          'Twas one vast Nothing all, and all slept fast in thee.

           2 Thine was the sway, ere heaven was form'd, or earth,
             Ere fruitful Thought conceived Creation's birth,
          Or midwife Word gave aid, and spoke the infant forth.

           3 Then various elements against thee join'd,
             In one more various animal combined,
          And framed the clamorous race of busy humankind.

           4 The tongue moved gently first, and speech was low,
             Till wrangling Science taught it noise and show,
          And wicked Wit arose, thy most abusive foe.

           5 But rebel Wit deserts thee oft in vain;
             Lost in the maze of words he turns again,
          And seeks a surer state, and courts thy gentle reign.

           6 Afflicted Sense thou kindly dost set free,
             Oppress'd with argumental tyranny,
          And routed Reason finds a safe retreat in thee.

           7 With thee in private modest Dulness lies,
             And in thy bosom lurks in Thought's disguise;
          Thou varnisher of fools, and cheat of all the wise!

           8 Yet thy indulgence is by both confess'd;
             Folly by thee lies sleeping in the breast,
          And 'tis in thee at last that Wisdom seeks for rest.

           9 Silence! the knave's repute, the whore's good name,
             The only honour of the wishing dame;
          Thy very want of tongue makes thee a kind of fame.

          10 But couldst thou seize some tongues that now are free,
             How Church and State should be obliged to thee!
          At Senate, and at Bar, how welcome would'st thou be!

          11 Yet Speech even there submissively withdraws
             From rights of subjects, and the poor man's cause:
          Then pompous Silence reigns, and stills the noisy laws.

          12 Past services of friends, good deeds of foes,
             What favourites gain, and what the nation owes,
          Fly the forgetful world, and in thy arms repose.

          13 The country wit, religion of the town,
             The courtier's learning, policy o' the gown,
          Are best by thee express'd, and shine in thee alone.

          14 The parson's cant, the lawyer's sophistry,
             Lord's quibble, critic's jest, all end in thee,
          All rest in peace at last, and sleep eternally.
 






VI. EARL OF DORSET.
          ARTEMISIA.62

          1 Though Artemisia talks, by fits,
            Of councils, classics, fathers, wits;
              Reads Malebranche, Boyle, and Locke:
            Yet in some things methinks she fails—
            'Twere well if she would pare her nails,
              And wear a cleaner smock.

          2 Haughty and huge as High-Dutch bride,
            Such nastiness, and so much pride
              Are oddly join'd by fate:
            On her large squab you find her spread,
            Like a fat corpse upon a bed,
              That lies and stinks in state.

          3 She wears no colours (sign of grace)
            On any part except her face;
              All white and black beside:
            Dauntless her look, her gesture proud,
            Her voice theatrically loud,
              And masculine her stride.

          4 So have I seen, in black and white
            A prating thing, a magpie height,
              Majestically stalk;
            A stately, worthless animal,
            That plies the tongue, and wags the tail,
              All flutter, pride, and talk.

          PHRYNE.

          1 Phryne had talents for mankind,
            Open she was, and unconfined,
              Like some free port of trade:
            Merchants unloaded here their freight,
            And agents from each foreign state
              Here first their entry made.

          2 Her learning and good breeding such,
            Whether the Italian or the Dutch,
              Spaniards or French came to her:
            To all obliging she'd appear,
            'Twas 'Si, Signor,' 'twas 'Yaw, Mynheer,'
              'Twas 'S' il vous plaît, Monsieur.'

          3 Obscure by birth, renown'd by crimes,
            Still changing names, religions, climes,
              At length she turns a bride:
            In diamonds, pearls, and rich brocades,
            She shines the first of batter'd jades,
              And flutters in her pride.

          4 So have I known those insects fair,
            (Which curious Germans hold so rare)
              Still vary shapes and dyes;
            Still gain new titles with new forms;
            First grubs obscene, then wriggling worms,
              Then painted butterflies.
 






VII. DR SWIFT.
          THE HAPPY LIFE OF A COUNTRY PARSON.

          Parson, these things in thy possessing
          Are better than the bishop's blessing:—
          A wife that makes conserves; a steed
          That carries double when there's need:
          October store, and best Virginia,
          Tithe-pig, and mortuary guinea:
          Gazettes sent gratis down, and frank'd,
          For which thy patron's weekly thank'd:
          A large Concordance, bound long since:
          Sermons to Charles the First, when prince:
          A Chronicle of ancient standing;
          A Chrysostom to smooth thy band in:
          The Polyglot—three parts—my text,
          Howbeit—likewise—now to my next:
          Lo, here the Septuagint—and Paul,
          To sum the whole—the close of all.
          He that has these, may pass his life,
          Drink with the squire, and kiss his wife;
          On Sundays preach, and eat his fill;
          And fast on Fridays—if he will;
          Toast Church and Queen, explain the news,
          Talk with churchwardens about pews,
          Pray heartily for some new gift,
          And shake his head at Doctor S——t.
