          'Uni aequus virtati atque ejus amicis.'
          SATIRE I. TO MR FORTESCUE.121

          P. There are (I scarce can think it, but am told)
          There are, to whom my satire seems too bold:
          Scarce to wise Peter complaisant enough,
          And something said of Chartres much too rough.
          The lines are weak, another's pleased to say,
          Lord Fanny122 spins a thousand such a day.
          Timorous by nature, of the rich in awe,
          I come to counsel learnèd in the law:
          'You'll give me, like a friend both sage and free,
          Advice; and (as you use) without a fee.'                 10

          F. I'd write no more.

          P.              Not write? but then I think,
          And for my soul I cannot sleep a wink.
          I nod in company, I wake at night,
          Fools rush into my head, and so I write.

          F. You could not do a worse thing for your life.
          Why, if the nights seem tedious—take a wife:
          Or rather truly, if your point be rest,
          Lettuce and cowslip-wine; probatum est.
          But talk with Celsus, Celsus will advise
          Hartshorn, or something that shall close your eyes.      20
          Or, if you needs must write, write Caesar's praise,
          You'll gain at least a knighthood, or the bays.

          P. What! like Sir Richard, rumbling, rough, and fierce,
          With arms, and George, and Brunswick crowd the verse,
          Rend with tremendous sound your ears asunder,
          With gun, drum, trumpet, blunderbuss, and thunder?
          Or, nobly wild, with Budgell's fire and force,
          Paint angels trembling round his falling horse?123

          F. Then all your Muse's softer art display,
          Let Carolina smooth the tuneful lay,                     30
          Lull with Amelia's liquid name the Nine,
          And sweetly flow through all the royal line.

          P. Alas! few verses touch their nicer ear;
          They scarce can bear their Laureate twice a-year;
          And justly Caesar scorns the poet's lays,
          It is to history he trusts for praise.

          F. Better be Cibber, I'll maintain it still,
          Than ridicule all taste, blaspheme quadrille,
          Abuse the city's best good men in metre,
          And laugh at peers that put their trust in Peter.        40
          Even those you touch not, hate you.

          P.                What should ail them?

          F. A hundred smart in Timon and in Balaam:
          The fewer still you name, you wound the more;
          Bond is but one, but Harpax is a score.

          P. Each mortal has his pleasure: none deny
          Scarsdale his bottle, Darty his ham-pie;
          Ridotta sips and dances, till she see
          The doubling lustres dance as fast as she;
          F—— loves the Senate, Hockley-hole his brother,
          Like in all else, as one egg to another.                 50
          I love to pour out all myself, as plain
          As downright Shippen,124 or as old Montaigne:
          In them, as certain to be loved as seen,
          The soul stood forth, nor kept a thought within;
          In me what spots (for spots I have) appear,
          Will prove at least the medium must be clear.
          In this impartial glass, my Muse intends
          Fair to expose myself, my foes, my friends;
          Publish the present age; but, where my text
          Is vice too high, reserve it for the next:               60
          My foes shall wish my life a longer date,
          And every friend the less lament my fate,
          My head and heart thus flowing through my quill,
          Verse-man or prose-man, term me which you will,
          Papist or Protestant, or both between,
          Like good Erasmus, in an honest mean,
          In moderation placing all my glory,
          While Tories call me Whig, and Whigs a Tory.

          Satire's my weapon, but I'm too discreet
          To run a-muck, and tilt at all I meet;                   70
          I only wear it in a land of hectors,
          Thieves, supercargoes, sharpers, and directors.
          Save but our army! and let Jove incrust
          Swords, pikes, and guns, with everlasting rust!
          Peace is my dear delight—not Fleury's more:
          But touch me, and no minister so sore.
          Whoe'er offends, at some unlucky time
          Slides into verse, and hitches in a rhyme,
          Sacred to ridicule his whole life long,
          And the sad burthen of some merry song.                  80

          Slander or poison dread from Delia's rage,
          Hard words or hanging, if your judge be Page.
          From furious Sappho scarce a milder fate,
          Pox'd by her love, or libell'd by her hate.
          Its proper power to hurt, each creature feels;
          Bulls aim their horns, and asses lift their heels;
          'Tis a bear's talent not to kick, but hug;
          And no man wonders he's not stung by pug.
          So drink with Walters, or with Chartres eat,
          They'll never poison you, they'll only cheat.            90

          Then, learnèd sir! (to cut the matter short)
          Whate'er my fate, or well or ill at court,
          Whether old age, with faint but cheerful ray,
          Attends to gild the evening of my day,
          Or death's black wing already be display'd,
          To wrap me in the universal shade;
          Whether the darken'd room to muse invite,
          Or whiten'd wall provoke the skewer to write:
          In durance, exile, Bedlam, or the Mint,
          Like Lee125 or Budgell,126 I will rhyme and print.      100

          F. Alas, young man! your days can ne'er be long,
          In flower of age you perish for a song!
          Plums and directors, Shylock and his wife,
          Will club their testers, now, to take your life!

          P. What? arm'd for Virtue, when I point the pen,
          Brand the bold front of shameless guilty men;
          Dash the proud gamester in his gilded car;
          Bare the mean heart that lurks beneath a star;
          Can there be wanting to defend her cause,
          Lights of the Church, or guardians of the laws?         110
          Could pension'd Boileau lash, in honest strain,
          Flatterers and bigots even in Louis' reign?
          Could Laureate Dryden pimp and friar engage,
          Yet neither Charles nor James be in a rage?
          And I not strip the gilding off a knave,
          Unplaced, unpension'd, no man's heir, or slave?
          I will, or perish in the generous cause:
          Hear this, and tremble! you who 'scape the laws.
          Yes, while I live, no rich or noble knave
          Shall walk the world, in credit, to his grave.          120
          TO VIRTUE ONLY, AND HER FRIENDS, A FRIEND,
          The world beside may murmur, or commend.
          Know, all the distant din that world can keep,
          Rolls o'er my grotto, and but soothes my sleep.
          There, my retreat the best companions grace,
          Chiefs out of war, and statesmen out of place.
          There St John mingles with my friendly bowl
          The feast of reason and the flow of soul:
          And he, whose lightning127 pierced th' Iberian lines,
          Now forms my quincunx, and now ranks my vines,          130
          Or tames the genius of the stubborn plain,
          Almost as quickly as he conquer'd Spain.

          Envy must own, I live among the great,
          No pimp of pleasure, and no spy of state,
          With eyes that pry not, tongue that ne'er repeats,
          Fond to spread friendships, but to cover heats;
          To help who want, to forward who excel;—
          This, all who know me, know; who love me, tell;
          And who unknown defame me, let them be
          Scribblers or peers, alike are mob to me.               140
          This is my plea, on this I rest my cause—
          What saith my counsel, learnèd in the laws?

          F. Your plea is good; but still, I say, beware!
          Laws are explain'd by men—so have a care!
          It stands on record, that in Richard's times
          A man was hang'd for very honest rhymes.
          Consult the statute: quart. I think, it is,
          Edwardi Sext. or prim, et quint. Eliz.
          See 'Libels, Satires'—here you have it—read.

          P. Libels and satires! lawless things indeed!         150
          But grave epistles, bringing vice to light,
          Such as a king might read, a bishop write,
          Such as Sir Robert would approve—

          F.                           Indeed?
          The case is alter'd—you may then proceed;
          In such a cause the plaintiff will be hiss'd,
          My lords the judges laugh, and you're dismiss'd.


          SATIRE II. TO MR BETHEL.

          What, and how great, the virtue and the art
          To live on little with a cheerful heart;
          (A doctrine sage, but truly none of mine)
          Let's talk, my friends, but talk before we dine;
          Not when a gilt buffet's reflected pride
          Turns you from sound philosophy aside;
          Not when from plate to plate your eyeballs roll,
          And the brain dances to the mantling bowl.

          Hear Bethel's sermon, one not versed in schools,
          But strong in sense, and wise without the rules.         10

          Go, work, hunt, exercise! (he thus began)
          Then scorn a homely dinner, if you can.
          Your wine lock'd up, your butler stroll'd abroad,
          Or fish denied (the river yet unthaw'd),
          If then plain bread and milk will do the feat,
          The pleasure lies in you, and not the meat.

          Preach as I please, I doubt our curious men
          Will choose a pheasant still before a hen;
          Yet hens of Guinea full as good I hold,
          Except you eat the feathers green and gold.              20
          Of carps and mullets why prefer the great,
          (Though cut in pieces ere my lord can eat)
          Yet for small turbots such esteem profess?
          Because God made these large, the other less.

          Oldfield,128 with more than harpy throat endued,
          Cries, 'Send me, gods! a whole hog barbecued!'
          Oh, blast it, south-winds! till a stench exhale
          Rank as the ripeness of a rabbit's tail.
          By what criterion do ye eat, d' ye think,
          If this is prized for sweetness, that for stink?         30
          When the tired glutton labours through a treat,
          He finds no relish in the sweetest meat,
          He calls for something bitter, something sour,
          And the rich feast concludes extremely poor:
          Cheap eggs, and herbs, and olives still we see;
          Thus much is left of old simplicity!

          The robin redbreast till of late had rest,
          And children sacred held a martin's nest,
          Till beccaficos sold so devilish dear
          To one that was, or would have been, a peer.             40
          Let me extol a cat, on oysters fed,
          I'll have a party at the Bedford-head;129
          Or even to crack live crawfish recommend;
          I'd never doubt at court to make a friend.

          'Tis yet in vain, I own, to keep a pother
          About one vice, and fall into the other:
          Between excess and famine lies a mean;
          Plain, but not sordid; though not splendid, clean.

          Avidien, or his wife (no matter which,
          For him you'll call a dog, and her a bitch)              50
          Sell their presented partridges, and fruits,
          And humbly live on rabbits and on roots:
          One half-pint bottle serves them both to dine,
          And is at once their vinegar and wine.
          But on some lucky day (as when they found
          A lost bank-bill, or heard their son was drown'd)
          At such a feast, old vinegar to spare,
          Is what two souls so generous cannot bear:
          Oil, though it stink, they drop by drop impart,          60
          But souse the cabbage with a bounteous heart.

          He knows to live, who keeps the middle state,
          And neither leans on this side, nor on that;
          Nor stops, for one bad cork, his butler's pay;
          Swears, like Albutius, a good cook away;
          Nor lets, like Naevius, every error pass,
          The musty wine, foul cloth, or greasy glass.
          Now hear what blessings temperance can bring:
          (Thus said our friend, and what he said I sing)
          First health: the stomach (cramm'd from every dish,      70
          A tomb of boil'd and roast, and flesh and fish,
          Where bile, and wind, and phlegm, and acid jar,
          And all the man is one intestine war)
          Remembers oft the school-boy's simple fare,
          The temperate sleeps, and spirits light as air.

          How pale each worshipful and reverend guest
          Rise from a clergy or a city feast!
          What life in all that ample body, say?
          What heavenly particle inspires the clay?
          The soul subsides, and wickedly inclines                 80
          To seem but mortal, even in sound divines.

          On morning wings how active springs the mind
          That leaves the load of yesterday behind!
          How easy every labour it pursues!
          How coming to the poet every Muse!
          Not but we may exceed some holy time,
          Or tired in search of truth, or search of rhyme;
          Ill health some just indulgence may engage,
          And more the sickness of long life, old age;
          For fainting age what cordial drop remains,              90
          If our intemperate youth the vessel drains?

          Our fathers praised rank ven'son. You suppose,
          Perhaps, young men! our fathers had no nose.
          Not so: a buck was then a week's repast,
          And 'twas their point, I ween, to make it last;
          More pleased to keep it till their friends could come,
          Than eat the sweetest by themselves at home.
          Why had not I in those good times my birth,
          Ere coxcomb-pies or coxcombs were on earth?

          Unworthy he, the voice of fame to hear—                100
          That sweetest music to an honest ear—
          (For, faith! Lord Fanny, you are in the wrong,
          The world's good word is better than a song,)
          Who has not learn'd, fresh sturgeon and ham-pie
          Are no rewards for want, and infamy!
          When luxury has lick'd up all thy pelf,
          Cursed by thy neighbours, thy trustees, thyself,
          To friends, to fortune, to mankind a shame,
          Think how posterity will treat thy name;
          And buy a rope, that future times may tell              110
          Thou hast at least bestow'd one penny well.

          'Right,' cries his lordship, 'for a rogue in need
          To have a taste is insolence indeed:
          In me 'tis noble, suits my birth and state,
          My wealth unwieldy, and my heap too great.'
          Then, like the sun, let bounty spread her ray,
          And shine that superfluity away.
          Oh, impudence of wealth! with all thy store,
          How dar'st thou let one worthy man be poor?
          Shall half the new-built churches round thee fall?      120
          Make quays, build bridges, or repair Whitehall:
          Or to thy country let that heap be lent,
          As Marlbro's was, but not at five per cent.

          Who thinks that Fortune cannot change her mind,
          Prepares a dreadful jest for all mankind.
          And who stands safest? tell me, is it he
          That spreads and swells in puff'd prosperity,
          Or, blest with little, whose preventing care
          In peace provides fit arms against a war?

          Thus Bethel spoke, who always speaks his thought,       130
          And always thinks the very thing he ought:
          His equal mind I copy what I can,
          And as I love, would imitate the man.
          In South-sea days not happier, when surmised
          The lord of thousands, than if now excised;
          In forest planted by a father's hand,
          Than in five acres now of rented land.
          Content with little, I can piddle here
          On broccoli and mutton, round the year;
          But ancient friends (though poor, or out of play)       140
          That touch my bell, I cannot turn away.
          'Tis true, no turbots dignify my boards,
          But gudgeons, flounders, what my Thames affords:
          To Hounslow Heath I point, and Bansted Down,
          Thence comes your mutton, and these chicks my own:
          From yon old walnut-tree a shower shall fall;
          And grapes, long lingering on my only wall,
          And figs from standard and espalier join;
          The devil is in you if you cannot dine:
          Then cheerful healths (your mistress shall have place)  150
          And, what's more rare, a poet shall say grace.

          Fortune not much of humbling me can boast;
          Though double tax'd, how little have I lost?
          My life's amusements have been just the same,
          Before and after standing armies came.
          My lands are sold, my father's house is gone;
          I'll hire another's; is not that my own,
          And yours, my friends? through whose free-opening gate
          None comes too early, none departs too late;
          (For I, who hold sage Homer's rule the best,            160
          Welcome the coming, speed the going guest).
          'Pray Heaven it last!' (cries Swift) 'as you go on;
          I wish to God this house had been your own:
          Pity to build, without a son or wife:
          Why, you'll enjoy it only all your life.'
          Well, if the use be mine, can it concern one,
          Whether the name belong to Pope or Vernon?
          What's property, dear Swift? You see it alter
          From you to me, from me to Peter Walter;
          Or, in a mortgage, prove a lawyer's share;              170
          Or, in a jointure, vanish from the heir;
          Or in pure equity (the case not clear)
          The Chancery takes your rents for twenty year:
          At best, it falls to some ungracious son,
          Who cries, 'My father's damn'd, and all's my own.'
          Shades, that to Bacon could retreat afford,
          Become the portion of a booby lord;
          And Helmsley, once proud Buckingham's130 delight,
          Slides to a scrivener or a city knight.
          Let lands and houses have what lords they will,         180
          Let us be fix'd, and our own masters still.


          THE FIRST EPISTLE OF THE FIRST BOOK OF HORACE.
          TO LORD BOLINGBROKE.

          St John, whose love indulged my labours past,
          Matures my present, and shall bound my last!
          Why will you break the Sabbath of my days?
          Now sick alike of envy and of praise.
          Public too long, ah, let me hide my age!
          See, modest Cibber now has left the stage:
          Our generals now, retired to their estates,
          Hang their old trophies o'er the garden gates,
          In life's cool evening satiate of applause,
          Nor fond of bleeding, even in Brunswick's cause.         10

          A voice there is, that whispers in my ear,
          ('Tis reason's voice, which sometimes one can hear)
          'Friend Pope! be prudent, let your Muse take breath,
          And never gallop Pegasus to death;
          Lest, still and stately, void of fire or force,
          You limp, like Blackmore on a Lord Mayor's horse.'

          Farewell, then, verse, and love, and every toy,
          The rhymes and rattles of the man or boy;
          What right, what true, what fit we justly call,
          Let this be all my care—for this is all:                20
          To lay this harvest up, and hoard with haste
          What every day will want, and most, the last.

          But ask not, to what doctors I apply;
          Sworn to no master, of no sect am I:
          As drives the storm, at any door I knock:
          And house with Montaigne now, or now with Locke.
          Sometimes a patriot, active in debate,
          Mix with the world, and battle for the state,
          Free as young Lyttelton, her cause pursue,
          Still true to virtue, and as warm as true:               30
          Sometimes with Aristippus,131 or St Paul,
          Indulge my candour, and grow all to all;
          Back to my native moderation slide,
          And win my way by yielding to the tide.

          Long, as to him who works for debt, the day,
          Long as the night to her whose love's away,
          Long as the year's dull circle seems to run,
          When the brisk minor pants for twenty-one:
          So slow the unprofitable moments roll,
          That lock up all the functions of my soul;               40
          That keep me from myself; and still delay
          Life's instant business to a future day:
          That task, which, as we follow, or despise,
          The eldest is a fool, the youngest wise.
          Which done, the poorest can no wants endure;
          And which, not done, the richest must be poor.

          Late as it is, I put myself to school,
          And feel some comfort not to be a fool.
          Weak though I am of limb, and short of sight,
          Far from a lynx, and not a giant quite;                  50
          I'll do what Mead and Cheselden advise,
          To keep these limbs, and to preserve these eyes.
          Not to go back, is somewhat to advance,
          And men must walk at least before they dance.

          Say, does thy blood rebel, thy bosom move
          With wretched avarice, or as wretched love?
          Know, there are words and spells which can control
          Between the fits this fever of the soul:
          Know, there are rhymes, which, fresh and fresh applied,
          Will cure the arrant'st puppy of his pride.              60
          Be furious, envious, slothful, mad, or drunk,
          Slave to a wife, or vassal to a punk,
          A Switz, a High-Dutch, or a Low-Dutch bear;
          All that we ask is but a patient ear.

          'Tis the first virtue, vices to abhor:
          And the first wisdom, to be fool no more.
          But to the world no bugbear is so great,
          As want of figure, and a small estate.
          To either India see the merchant fly,
          Scared at the spectre of pale poverty!                   70
          See him, with pains of body, pangs of soul,
          Burn through the tropic, freeze beneath the pole!
          Wilt thou do nothing for a nobler end,
          Nothing, to make philosophy thy friend?
          To stop thy foolish views, thy long desires,
          And ease thy heart of all that it admires?

          Here, Wisdom calls: 'Seek Virtue first, be bold!
          As gold to silver, Virtue is to gold.'
          There, London's voice: 'Get money, money still!
          And then let virtue follow, if she will.'                80
          This, this the saving doctrine, preach'd to all,
          From low St James's up to high St Paul;
          From him whose quill stands quiver'd at his ear,
          To him who notches sticks132 at Westminster.

          Barnard133 in spirit, sense, and truth abounds;
          'Pray then, what wants he?' Fourscore thousand pounds;
          A pension, or such harness for a slave
          As Bug now has, and Dorimant would have.
          Barnard, thou art a cit, with all thy worth;
          But Bug and D——l, their Honours, and so forth.         90

          Yet every child another song will sing,
          'Virtue, brave boys! 'tis virtue makes a king.'
          True, conscious honour is to feel no sin,
          He's arm'd without that's innocent within;
          Be this thy screen, and this thy wall of brass;
          Compared to this, a minister's an ass.

          And say, to which shall our applause belong,
          This new court-jargon, or the good old song?
          The modern language of corrupted peers,
          Or what was spoke at Cressy and Poictiers?              100
          Who counsels best? who whispers, 'Be but great,
          With praise or infamy leave that to fate;
          Get place and wealth, if possible, with grace;
          If not, by any means get wealth and place.'
          For what? to have a box where eunuchs sing,
          And foremost in the circle eye a king.
          Or he, who bids thee face with steady view
          Proud fortune, and look shallow greatness through:
          And, while he bids thee, sets th' example too?
          If such a doctrine, in St James's air,                  110
          Should chance to make the well-dress'd rabble stare;
          If honest S——z take scandal at a spark,
          That less admires the palace than the park:
          Faith, I shall give the answer Reynard gave:
          'I cannot like, dread sir, your royal cave:
          Because I see, by all the tracks about,
          Full many a beast goes in, but none comes out.'
          Adieu to virtue, if you're once a slave:
          Send her to court, you send her to her grave.

          Well, if a king's a lion, at the least                  120
          The people are a many-headed beast:
          Can they direct what measures to pursue,
          Who know themselves so little what to do?
          Alike in nothing but one lust of gold,
          Just half the land would buy, and half be sold:
          Their country's wealth our mightier misers drain,
          Or cross, to plunder provinces, the main;
          The rest, some farm the poor-box, some the pews;
          Some keep assemblies, and would keep the stews;
          Some with fat bucks on childless dotards fawn;          130
          Some win rich widows by their chine and brawn;
          While with the silent growth of ten per cent,
          In dirt and darkness, hundreds stink content.

          Of all these ways, if each pursues his own,
          Satire, be kind, and let the wretch alone:
          But show me one who has it in his power
          To act consistent with himself an hour.
          Sir Job sail'd forth, the evening bright and still,
          'No place on earth' (he cried) 'like Greenwich hill!'
          Up starts a palace, lo, the obedient base               140
          Slopes at its foot, the woods its sides embrace,
          The silver Thames reflects its marble face.
          Now let some whimsy, or that devil within,
          Which guides all those who know not what they mean,
          But give the knight (or give his lady) spleen;
          'Away, away! take all your scaffolds down,
          For, snug's the word: my dear! we'll live in town.'

          At amorous Flavio is the stocking thrown?
          That very night he longs to lie alone.
          The fool, whose wife elopes some thrice a quarter,      150
          For matrimonial solace dies a martyr.
          Did ever Proteus, Merlin, any witch,
          Transform themselves so strangely as the rich?
          Well, but the poor—the poor have the same itch;
          They change their weekly barber, weekly news,
          Prefer a new japanner to their shoes,
          Discharge their garrets, move their beds, and run
          (They know not whither) in a chaise and one;
          They hire their sculler, and when once aboard,
          Grow sick, and damn the climate—like a lord.           160

          You laugh, half-beau, half-sloven if I stand;
          My wig all powder, and all snuff my band;
          You laugh, if coat and breeches strangely vary,
          White gloves, and linen worthy Lady Mary!134
          But, when no prelate's lawn with hair-shirt lined
          Is half so incoherent as my mind,
          When (each opinion with the next at strife,
          One ebb and flow of follies all my life)
          I plant, root up; I build, and then confound;
          Turn round to square, and square again to round;        170
          You never change one muscle of your face,
          You think this madness but a common case,
          Nor once to Chancery, nor to Hale apply;
          Yet hang your lip, to see a seam awry!
          Careless how ill I with myself agree,
          Kind to my dress, my figure, not to me.
          Is this my guide, philosopher, and friend?
          This, he who loves me, and who ought to mend?
          Who ought to make me (what he can, or none),
          That man divine whom Wisdom calls her own;              180
          Great without title, without fortune bless'd;
          Rich even when plunder'd, honour'd while oppress'd;
          Loved without youth, and follow'd without power;
          At home, though exiled; free, though in the Tower;
          In short, that reasoning, high, immortal thing,
          Just less than Jove, and much above a king,
          Nay, half in heaven—except (what's mighty odd)
          A fit of vapours clouds this demi-god.


          THE SIXTH EPISTLE OF THE FIRST BOOK OF HORACE.
          TO MR MURRAY.135

          'Not to admire, is all the art I know,
          To make men happy, and to keep them so.'
          (Plain truth, dear Murray, needs no flowers of speech,
          So take it in the very words of Creech.)136

          This vault of air, this congregated ball,
          Self-centred sun, and stars that rise and fall,
          There are, my friend! whose philosophic eyes
          Look through and trust the Ruler with his skies,
          To Him commit the hour, the day, the year,
          And view this dreadful All without a fear.               10

          Admire we then what earth's low entrails hold,
          Arabian shores, or Indian seas infold;
          All the mad trade of fools and slaves for gold?
          Or popularity? or stars and strings?
          The mob's applauses, or the gifts of kings?
          Say with what eyes we ought at courts to gaze,
          And pay the great our homage of amaze?

          If weak the pleasure that from these can spring,
          The fear to want them is as weak a thing:
          Whether we dread, or whether we desire,                  20
          In either case, believe me, we admire;
          Whether we joy or grieve, the same the curse,
          Surprised at better, or surprised at worse.
          Thus good or bad, to one extreme betray
          The unbalanced mind, and snatch the man away:
          For virtue's self may too much zeal be had;
          The worst of madmen is a saint run mad.

          Go then, and, if you can, admire the state
          Of beaming diamonds, and reflected plate;
          Procure a taste to double the surprise,                  30
          And gaze on Parian charms with learnèd eyes:
          Be struck with bright brocade, or Tyrian dye,
          Our birthday nobles' splendid livery.
          If not so pleased, at council-board rejoice,
          To see their judgments hang upon thy voice;
          From morn to night, at Senate, Rolls, and Hall,
          Plead much, read more, dine late, or not at all.
          But wherefore all this labour, all this strife?
          For fame, for riches, for a noble wife?
          Shall one whom nature, learning, birth, conspired        40
          To form, not to admire, but be admired,
          Sigh, while his Chloe, blind to wit and worth,
          Weds the rich dulness of some son of earth?
          Yet time ennobles, or degrades each line;
          It brighten'd Craggs's,137 and may darken thine:
          And what is fame? the meanest have their day,
          The greatest can but blaze, and pass away.
          Graced as thou art, with all the power of words,
          So known, so honour'd, at the House of Lords:
          Conspicuous scene! another yet is nigh                   50
          (More silent far) where kings and poets lie;
          Where Murray (long enough his country's pride)
          Shall be no more than Tully, or than Hyde!

          Rack'd with sciatics, martyr'd with the stone,
          Will any mortal let himself alone?
          See Ward by batter'd beaux invited over,
          And desperate misery lays hold on Dover.
          The case is easier in the mind's disease;
          There all men may be cured, whene'er they please.
          Would ye be blest? despise low joys, low gains;          60
          Disdain whatever Cornbury138 disdains;
          Be virtuous, and be happy for your pains.

          But art thou one, whom new opinions sway,
          One who believes as Tindal139 leads the way,
          Who virtue and a church alike disowns,
          Thinks that but words, and this but brick and stones?
          Fly then, on all the wings of wild desire,
          Admire whate'er the maddest can admire:
          Is wealth thy passion? Hence! from pole to pole,
          Where winds can carry, or where waves can roll,          70
          For Indian spices, for Peruvian gold,
          Prevent the greedy, and outbid the bold:
          Advance thy golden mountain to the skies;
          On the broad base of fifty thousand rise,
          Add one round hundred, and (if that's not fair)
          Add fifty more, and bring it to a square.
          For, mark the advantage; just so many score
          Will gain a wife with half as many more,
          Procure her beauty, make that beauty chaste,
          And then such friends—as cannot fail to last.           80
          A man of wealth is dubb'd a man of worth,
          Venus shall give him form, and Anstis140 birth.
          (Believe me, many a German prince is worse,
          Who, proud of pedigree, is poor of purse).
          His wealth brave Timon gloriously confounds;
          Ask'd for a groat, he gives a hundred pounds;
          Or if three ladies like a luckless play,141
          Takes the whole house upon the poet's day.
          Now, in such exigencies not to need,
          Upon my word, you must be rich indeed;                   90
          A noble superfluity it craves,
          Not for yourself, but for your fools and knaves;
          Something, which for your honour they may cheat,
          And which it much becomes you to forget.
          If wealth alone then make and keep us bless'd,
          Still, still be getting, never, never rest.

          But if to power and place your passion lie,
          If in the pomp of life consist the joy;
          Then hire a slave, or (if you will) a lord              100
          To do the honours, and to give the word;
          Tell at your levée, as the crowds approach,
          To whom to nod, whom take into your coach,
          Whom honour with your hand: to make remarks,
          Who rules in Cornwall, or who rules in Berks:
          'This may be troublesome, is near the chair:
          That makes three members, this can choose a mayor.'
          Instructed thus, you bow, embrace, protest,
          Adopt him son, or cousin at the least,
          Then turn about, and laugh at your own jest.            110

          Or if your life be one continued treat,
          If to live well means nothing but to eat;
          Up, up! cries Gluttony, 'tis break of day,
          Go drive the deer, and drag the finny prey;
          With hounds and horns go hunt an appetite—
          So Russel did, but could not eat at night,
          Call'd, happy dog! the beggar at his door,
          And envied thirst and hunger to the poor.

          Or shall we every decency confound,
          Through taverns, stews, and bagnios take our round,     120
          Go dine with Chartres, in each vice outdo
          K—l's lewd cargo, or Ty—y's crew;
          From Latian syrens, French Circaean feasts,
          Return well travell'd, and transform'd to beasts,
          Or for a titled punk, or foreign flame,
          Renounce our country, and degrade our name?

          If, after all, we must with Wilmot own,
          The cordial drop of life is love alone,
          And Swift cry wisely, 'Vive la bagatelle!'
          The man that loves and laughs, must sure do well.       130

          Adieu—if this advice appear the worst,
          E'en take the counsel which I gave you first:
          Or better precepts if you can impart,
          Why do, I'll follow them with all my heart.